--- Page 1 ---
Referee Rep ort - Towards identifying p ossible fault-tolerant
advantage of quantum linear system algorithms in terms of space,
time and energy
March 10, 2026
The authors provide a detailed resource estimation for the HHL quantum linear system algorithm
running on a fault-tolerant sup erconducting device, including energy cost es tim ates. Logic al re-
sources (T-gate counts, qubit counts) are estimated via a Q# imple mentation, and Trotter and
QFT errors are b ounded using exp onential-typ e error b ounds from Ref. [13]. These logical re-
sources are then mapp e d to physical resources using a surface co de optimization framework, and
the authors compare the resulting quantum overhead against the classical conjugate gradient (CG)
metho d, rep orting p ossible quantum advantages at matrix sizes
 N
 ˘
 2
33
to 2
48
, requiring
 O
 (10
5
)
physical qubits. Energy estimates are based on IBM Quantum System Two.
The central question in this work, namely the energy and quantum resource cos t crossover p oint for
an imp ortant quantum algorithm, is an imp ortant and timely question for the community. Overall,
the authors provide a useful metho dology for p erforming detailed complexity estimates across
time, space, and energy. The error analysis using exp onential-typ e error b ounds is interesting and
valuable to the c ommunity. However, in its current state, I do not b elieve the pap er is suitable for
publication without ma jor revisions or clarications. Several assumptions underlying the crossover
claims with classical metho ds need to b e claried and discrepancies b etween the main text and
app endices need to b e addressed for the results to b e reliable .
Ma jor Comments
1. The use of the original HHL algorithm as opp os ed to state-of-the-art (SOTA) QLSA reduces the
practical relevance of the results. The authors acknowledge that \p olynomial scalings on
 s
,
 
,
1
="
 has b een up dated for the convenience of exact pre-factor derivation" (p. 3), implying that
they intentionally use the original HHL framework with
 O
 (

2
s="
2
) scaling rather than mo dern
QLSA variants (Refs. [33{37]) that achieve dramatically improve d dep endence on the condition
numb er (e.g., linear in
 
). However, since the central result of the work is a crossover analysis
b etween quantum and classical metho ds, using an outdated algorithm reduces the relevance of
the c laim ed advantage b oundaries. At a minimum, the authors should discuss/estimate the shift
in the crossover p oints with SOTA algorithms.
2. The authors exclude data loading and readout costs from the resource es timates. However,
ecient data loading remains a ma jor challenge for general classes of matrices, and hence the
claimed advantage b oundary could shift signicantly when these costs are included. The cap-
tion for Figure 1 s hould caution the readers regarding this assumption. Additionally, it would
1

--- Page 2 ---
strengthen the pap er to provide even rough es timates of how the crossover p oints would shit
under realistic data loading mo dels.
3. The comparison with classical baselines is not c omple tely cle ar. The main te xt refers to the
conjugate gradient (CG) metho d as the equivale nt classical baseline, which requires symmetric
p ositive denite (SPD) syste ms, as noted in App endix D. However, the analysis in App endix D
is based on CGNE. These are dierent algorithms, as CGNE squares the condition numb er and
requires more ops p er iteration. It app ears that this square factor was included in Thm. 4,
but this is not readily apparent from the text. Moreover, the analysis seems to mix dierent
classes of matrices { some p ositive semi-denite, some symme tric. The authors should clarify
whether or not they are assuming the input matrix is Hermitian during the classical baseline.
If so, along with the assumption on the eigenvalues of A, CG is a reasonable comparison, but
in the app endix the authors compare with CGNE. Regardless, one s hould ensure a comparison
against state-of-the-art classical metho ds including preconditioned, sparse solvers, rather than
costly normal equation-based metho ds. All in all, the comparison with classical metho ds is not
clear and do es not seem to b e prop erly handled b etween the b o dy and the app endices.
4. The classical CG runtime is estimated on a single desktop CPU at 1 GHz / 50 W, while the
quantum side uses an optimized fault-tolerant architecture with
 O
 (10
5
) physical qubits. This is
not an apples-to-apples comparison. App endix D c ompare s against Cholesky decomp osition on
sup ercomputers, pushing the crossover to
 ˘
 2
100
, yet this result app ears only in the app endix.
The Cholesky/sup ercomputer comparison should b e featured in the main text and the main
text should clearly state that the advantage b oundaries would dep end on the classical hardware
used. Moreover, the classical hardware assumed for comparison is likely not representative of the
hardware that would likely b e used for these classes of problems. The energy cost for quantum
hardware is estimated using numb ers found in Ref. 18, but these numb ers are based on
 current
estimates and are, in the words of the authors of Ref. 18, \
extremely
 rough". These numb ers
also ignore economies of sc ale that are likely aorded by larger system sizes.
5. The probabilis tic b ound (Eq. B19) used to prove Statement 1 is derived from numerical exp er-
iments on \small m atrix s ize" (pg. 17), with the claim that \the error do es not dep end on
 n
."
This claim is crucial for the entire scaling analysis, yet: (a) Figure 9 lacks axis lab els and a
description of the exp erimental setup; (b) the matrix sizes, distributions, and numb er of sam-
ples are not rep orte d; (c) no rigorous justication is given for why small-matrix b ehavior should
extrap olate to larger matrices. This needs to b e explained clearly.
6. Figure 1 assumes
 
 =
 s
 = log (
N
 ). (1) This is an optimistic assumption on
 
 that may only
b e valid in limited settings. Many real-world linear systems have condition numb ers that grow
p olynomially with
 N
 . Since the quantum cost scales as
 
2
and CG scales linearly in
 
, the
crossover p oint is very sensitive to this assumption. The authors should validate this assumption
using examples of matrix classes where this holds true. It would also strengthen the pap er to
present crossover estimates under more realistic ass um ptions (e.g.,
 
 =
 N

). (2) The assumption
on
 s
 = log (
N
 ) is quite interesting. The sparsity is usually a xed prop erty of the matrix structure
and not a function of its size. The authors should again validate this assumption using examples
of real matrix classes.
Minor Comments
1. Many of the relevant symb ols are either ill dene d, overloaded, or not dened. For e xample ,
T
 represents at least four distinct quantities throughout: the numb er of
 T
 -gates, the SWAP
2

--- Page 3 ---
op erator, the numb er of rep eated unitaries, and the total op erating time.
2. In pg. 17, Fig. 19, the axes are unlab eled and the caption do es not desc rib e the exp erimental
setup (matrix typ es, sizes, numb er of samples).
3. Multiple grammatic al and sp elling errors are found throughout the pap er. A few examples:
\primarly" (p. 3), \physicla" (p. 5, p. 22), \Toi" (throughout; should b e \Tooli"), \tyler ex-
pansion" (p. 15; should b e \Taylor"), \dividingng" (App endix D), \changable" (p. 3), \Tranvis"
(p. 6). Please check for typ os and grammatical errors.
4. The limitations and assumptions used in the work such as exclusion of data loading and oracle
costs, use of original HHL, and classical baseline on 1 CPU, should b e restated in the Conclusions.
3
