
--- PDF page 1 ---
T owards identifying possible fault-tolerant advantage of quantum linear system
algorithms in terms of space, time and energy
Y ue T u,1, 2Mark Dubynskyi,3, 4Mohammad Mohammadisiahroudi,5Katia
Riashchentceva,4Jinglei Cheng,1Dmitry Ryashchentse,6T amás T erlaky ,5and Junyu Liu1
1Department of Computer Science, The University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, P A 15260, USA
2Department of Computational and Applied Mathematics,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
3Mason Experimental Geometry Lab, F airfax, V A 22030, USA
4The University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA
5Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, P A 18015, USA
6Charles Schwab Corporation, W estlake, TX 76262, USA
(Dated: F ebruary 15, 2025)
Quantum computing, a prominent non-V on Neu-
mann paradigm beyond Moore’s law, offers su-
perpolynomial speedups over classical methods
for specific problems. However, its practical ad-
vantages in terms of space, time, and energy ef-
ficiency remain unclear. F urthermore, its appli-
cability to critical real-world problems in science
and industry , such as machine learning, is still un-
certain. Finally , quantum noise in current devices
entails significant overheads for error correction
and fault tolerance, complicating fair comparisons
with their classical counterparts. In this paper,
we address all three issues through a detailed re-
source estimation of space, time, and energy for
fault-tolerant superconducting quantum devices.
W e focus on the Harrow–Hassidim–Lloyd (HHL)
algorithm, a quantum linear system algorithm
with practical applications in machine learning.
F or the pure computing process of these algo-
rithms (excluding memory and data transfer) and
compared to the exact classical counterpart (the
conjugate gradient method), we find that pos-
sible quantum advantages could emerge around
the matrix size N≈233∼248, requiring O(105)
physical qubits, O(1012∼1013)Joules of energy ,
and approximately 10 days of computational time
(O(106)seconds) under precise settings of sur-
face code fault-tolerant computation and magic
state distillation, with condition number, spar-
sity , and precision κ,s≈ O(10∼100),ϵ∼0.01. Key
parameters for the algorithm, including N,κ,s,ϵ ,
are all adjustable in our resource estimator. A
precise map of the quantum-classical comparison
for these parameters is provided, illustrating the
boundary of a practical, potential quantum ad-
vantage. Our work demonstrates that significant
benefits from quantum computing in important
real-world problems, such as quantum linear sys-
tem algorithms, are achievable and quantitatively
determines how advanced a fault-tolerant quan-
tum computer must be to realize this goal.I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing [1] stands as the leading
paradigm of next-generation computing technology . Un-
like traditional computing, quantum computers can ac-
cess and manipulate quantum states, which serve as car-
riers of information for computational purposes. One of
the primary motivations for developing quantum com-
puting is its potential to achieve a possible quantum ad-
vantage over its classical counterparts in solving certain
problems. This potential quantum advantage, studied
primarily in terms of time cost within computational
complexity theory , has been theoretically demonstrated
in problems such as factoring [2], searching [3], and simu-
lation [4]. These advancements offer hope for sustaining
or surpassing Moore’s law in the semiconductor industry .
However, beyond the time complexity estimated in the
gate models from theoretical computer science, it is chal-
lenging to estimate and justify the possible quantum ad-
vantage in practice. First, practical cost estimation of
quantum computing requires state-of-the-art knowledge,
from detailed theory covering prefactors in front of the
big-O notation of complexity [5, 6], to explicit designs
of quantum hardware, and it includes more comprehen-
sive measurement such as time costs (measured in sec-
onds), space costs (number of physical qubits), and in
particular energy costs. Especially , the complex nature
of quantitative energy sustainability estimation is highly
uninvestigated, although the possible energy advantage
of quantum computing algorithm is discussed mostly in
the qualitative argument [7, 8]. Second, although the
existence of potential quantum advantage for some algo-
rithms is solidly justified in theory , it is challenging to
prove that those algorithms can turn into real-world, sig-
nificant benefits especially for commercial applications
[9]. Finally , quantum states are extremely fragile and
current quantum processors are noisy , making quantum
error correction the only possible way to make large-scale,
fault-tolerant quantum computing. F ault-tolerance, al-
though sustainable in theory , requires lots of additional
resources and experimental challenges, making precise re-
source estimation much more challenging.
In this work, we address all three of these challenges

--- PDF page 2 ---
2
by conducting a full-stack, energy-aware resource esti-
mation for the so-called Harrow–Hassidim–Lloyd (HHL)
algorithm [10]. The HHL algorithm provides a Quantum
Linear System Algorithm (QLSA) that can be used for
matrix inversion. Given a linear equation A|x⟩=|b⟩,
the algorithm returns a quantum state |x⟩=A−1|b⟩as a
solution. F or certain classes of matrices, it has been theo-
retically shown that the algorithm runs in logN time for
anN×N matrix, making it exponentially faster than any
known classical counterpart. Since linear algebra appli-
cations are ubiquitous in modern science and technology ,
the algorithm is regarded as one of the most promising
applications for large-scale, fault-tolerant quantum pro-
cessors [11].
T o identify the regime of possible, practical quantum
advantages, we systematically investigate the costs of
QLSA. The primary input of QLSA is a general Hermi-
tian matrix A of dimension N= 2n, with row sparsity s
(wheres= max j(# of nonzero entries in row jofA)),
precisionϵ, and condition number κ. F or non-Hermitian
matrices, one can effectively solve a corresponding Her-
mitian matrix instead, requiring only one additional
qubit [10, 11]. At the logical level, we primarily adopt the
original and classical HHL framework [10, 11]. F or quan-
tum simulation, we employ the one-sparse Hamiltonian
simulation model to implement eiAt, using [12] to esti-
mate the T rotter error. Finally , we provide an explicit
formula for estimating resource requirements at the log-
ical level for HHL, particularly focusing on the number
of different types of quantum gates. These estimates are
validated using a quantum circuit state-vector simulation
code.
Moreover, we extend our analysis to resource estima-
tions at the fault-tolerant level. T o achieve this, we utilize
the framework proposed by Litinski [13] to estimate the
fault-tolerance resource. The framework assume clifford
gates are cheap and only accepts the number of T-gates
as input, then search for the optimal surface code scheme
that will minimize the space-time cost with logical error
rate below one percent. . Finally , we compare our fault-
tolerant resource estimates with those of classical algo-
rithms. In particular, we discuss the classical counterpart
to the Quantum Linear System Algorithm (QLSA): the
conjugate gradient (CG) method [14]. The CG method
is widely regarded as the classical analogue of QLSA,
as it similarly exploits the sparsity and well-conditioned
nature of the problem. Its time complexity is given by
O(Nsκ log(1/ϵ)). W e conduct a detailed analysis of its
exact scaling behavior and provide an estimation of its
clock cycle requirements.
The primary energy costs associated with executing
the HHL algorithm stem from the cooling system. On
the quantum side, we estimate the energy consumption
based on the model proposed in [15], assuming that the
energy cost scales linearly with the number of qubits, the
total energy cost is given by the product of the runtime,
the number of physical qubits, and a cooling eﬀiciency
factor.T o estimate the cooling eﬀiciency , we refer to [16],
which provides an approximation based on IBM Quan-
tum System T wo’s dilution refrigerator, with an esti-
mated energy eﬀiciency of 6.25 W atts per qubit. How-
ever, it is important to note that cooling eﬀiciency is
highly dependent on the quantum computer’s architec-
ture and may vary significantly as quantum hardware
evolves. Consequently , this estimation should be viewed
as a rough approximation rather than a precise metric.
On the classical side, we estimate the energy consump-
tion using the power requirements of a typical desktop
CPU. A standard desktop processor operating at a clock
frequency of 1 GHz consumes approximately 50 W atts.
This provides a baseline for evaluating the comparative
energy eﬀiciency of classical and quantum computations
in the context of the QLSA algorithm.
Note that we consider only the costs incurred dur-
ing the computation process. The costs associated with
the interface between classical and quantum processors—
such as uploading the matrix A and the vector |b⟩to
the quantum device, as well as downloading the state
|x⟩to classical memory—are not addressed in this work.
The uploading problem can be mitigated by fast quan-
tum memory solutions, such as Quantum Random Ac-
cess Memory (QRAM) [17], whose circuits are, in fact,
classically simulatable [18]. Meanwhile, the downloading
process depends on the specific needs of the user. Since
classical users cannot handle exponentially large datasets
[19], quantum tomography techniques [20, 21] can be em-
ployed to extract partial information from |x⟩.
Our work is organized as follows. In Section II, we
discuss our results comparing quantum and classical ap-
proaches, along with their implications for computational
speed and energy eﬀiciency . In Section III, we outline
the key methodologies employed to obtain these results.
At the logical level, this includes circuit implementation
and exact scaling derivation, while at the physical level,
it encompasses the implementation of the surface code
optimizer . In Section IV, we provide conclusions and an
outlook on future research directions. Additional techni-
cal details, including a detailed formulation of the HHL
algorithm, T rotter simulation strategies, surface code se-
tups, classical counterparts, and energy analysis, are pro-
vided in the Supplementary Material.
II. RESUL TS
In this chapter, we present the main conclusions of
our study , structured in two parts. The first part ex-
amines the operation count overhead associated with the
algorithm’s execution, independent of hardware param-
eters. F or the quantum component, this is quantified
by the logical T-gate count—the bottleneck logical re-
source in surface code-based quantum computing—while
the classical component is evaluated based on the number
of floating-point operations (FLOPs).

--- PDF page 3 ---
3
Proposition 1. Consider a system of linear equations
Ax=b, whereAhas been scaled such that its eigenvalues
lie in the interval [1
κ,1]. Denote by |b⟩the normalized
quantum state proportional to b. Assume access to an
oracle that provides access to the elements of a sparse
submatrix of A. Then, there exists a quantum algorithm
that takes the input state |b⟩and outputs the normalized
solution state |˜x⟩with additive error ||˜x−x||less thanϵ.
The algorithm requires T T -gates and Q queries to the
oracle, where:
T=q
320
3πκ2s
ϵ2×(18 logN+ 90r+ 15), (1)
Q=q
320
3πκ2s
ϵ2×2, (2)
whereN is the matrix size, κis the condition number, s
is the sparsity of A, andϵis the error.
W e refer the reader to appendix A for a detailed
derivation of 1. Here, we emphasize that 1 exhibit
different scaling compared to the results presented in
the original paper, where the complexity was given by
O 
log(N)·s2κ2/ϵ
.In our work, we have increased the
dependence on ϵto order 2 while reducing the depen-
dence onsto order 1.
The dependence on ϵis because we comprehensively
analised the error introduced by trotterization and QFT,
while the original paper’s error estimation only account
for the latter. F or detailed derivation we refer readers to
B.
The reduction in s-dependence is achieved by assum-
ing that the matrix is perfectly decomposed into exactly
ssub matrices at the oracle level. Although this as-
sumption does not hold for general sparse matrices, many
QLSA applications involve fixed matrix structures, which
allow for eﬀicient oracle implementation that satisfies this
assumption, for example, in [22] and [23]. If we remove
this assumption, we’ll have to additionally implement
the decomposition procedure, one approach is to utilize
graph coloring algorithm, which decompose the matrix
into 6s2one sparse matrices, thus increase a prefactor of
6and square the dependence on sparsity . F urthermore,
the graph coloring procedure is being called in each HS1,
and according to our implementation, the graph coloring
procedure involve around 200×logN T -gates, this cost is
about 10 times the other cost in HS1 ( 18 logN+90r+15 ),
thus introducing another prefactor of 10, so overall, the
cost for graph coloring based general QLSA will have a
scaling of 60sT .
Proposition 2. F or the CG method solving the linear
systemAx=b, the algorithm runs in C FLOPs, where:
C= (4Ns+ 14N)×1
2κlog2
ϵ
(3)
N is the matrix size, kis the condition number, sis the
sparsity, and ϵis the error threshold.The detailed derivation of 2 we refer readers to ap-
pendix 4
Next, we incorporate hardware parameters to illustrate
the specific runtime overhead and its relationship with
various input parameters. The assumed hardware pa-
rameters are as follows: the quantum computer has an
infinite number of physical qubits, a physical qubit er-
ror rate of 10−5, a logical cycle execution time of 10 ns,
and an energy consumption of 6.25 watts per physical
qubit. W e present heatmaps 1 and 1, which illustrate
the runtime and energy cost ratio between classical and
quantum algorithms. In these heatmaps, blue regions
indicate a ratio less than 1, implying that the quantum
algorithm incurs lower overhead than its classical coun-
terpart. Consequently , these regions can be interpreted
as exhibiting possible quantum advantage. Also, we pro-
vide line charts 1, 1, and 1 to depict how runtime, space,
and energy costs vary with matrix size, where we assume
conditional number to be fixed to 10, the sparsity to be
logN. Of course, this assumption may not perfectly align
with future quantum computers. F or readers interested
in different configurations, the runtime estimation and
energy consumption can be easily rescaled based on the
ratio of the new parameters for clock cycle time and en-
ergy consumption per qubit.
III. METHODS
A. Quantum part
In this work, we present the first end-to-end analysis
of the QLSA, covering the resource cost from logical level
to runtime-level. The overall workflow of this study is il-
lustrated in Fig. 1 and is broadly divided into two stages:
logical resource analysis and physical resource analysis.
At the logical level, we first implemented the quan-
tum circuit for the Quantum Linear Systems Algorithm
(QLSA) using Q#, a programming language designed for
circuit-based quantum computing. This implementation
allowed us to estimate the logical qubit and T-gate re-
quirements for each submodule. Among all submodules
in the QLSA algorithm, the primary bottleneck lies in one
specific subroutine—the one-sparse Hamiltonian simula-
tion (HS1). This subroutine is responsible for construct-
ing a unitary operation that implements eiAt, whereA
is the input matrix. The high resource demand of HS1
stems from the T rotterization process, which requires ap-
plying HS1 repeatedly to suppress the error to a desired
level. Additionally , the unitary operation itself must be
executed multiple times as part of the Quantum Phase
Estimation (QPE) procedure, further increasing the to-
tal number of HS1 invocations. T o precisely determine
the scaling behavior of HS1, it is essential to analyze
the algorithm’s error. There are two primary sources of
error in the QLSA algorithm: (1) errors introduced by
T rotterization and (2) errors from the Quantum F ourier
T ransform (QFT). While previous analyses of QLSA have

--- PDF page 4 ---
4
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
n 1e101020304050s = 10,  = 0.01
Boundary
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
n 1e1051015202530
s = 100,  = 0.01
Boundary
0 2 4
n 1e8510152025301/
 = 10, s = 100
Boundary
246
246810
51015202530
(a) Runtime Ratio: Classical / Quantum, the blue region corresponds to possible quantum advantage.
0 2 4
n 1e141020304050s = 10,  = 0.01
Boundary
0 2 4
n 1e1451015202530
s = 100,  = 0.01
Boundary
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
n 1e13510152025301/
 = 10, s = 100
Boundary
123456
2468
51015202530
(b) Energy Ratio, Classical / Quantum, the blue region corresponds to possible quantum advantage.
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
log2(n)012345Runtime (s)1e5Runtime Comparison: =s=log2(n),=0.01
Quantum
Classical
Crossing at log2(n)  33
(c) Runtime Comparison
10 20 30 40 50
log2(n)0246Energy (J)1e12Energy Comparison: =s=log2(n),=0.01
Quantum
Classical
Crossing at n  48
 (d) Energy Comparison
20 40 60
log(n)
0.40.60.81.01.2Quantum Space (qubits)1e5
Quantum Space (qubits)
Runtime (s)
0.00.20.40.60.81.0
Runtime (s)1e6Quantum Space and Runtime vs. log (n)
 (e) Runtime and Space Cost
FIG. 1: Comparison of Quantum Linear System Algorithm (QLSA) and Classical Conjugate Gradient
Algorithm. In the plots, N represents matrix size, s is the sparsity , k is the condition number, ϵis the error
tolerance in terms of vector-2 norm. (a) & (b): Heatmaps showing the ratio of classical runtime to quantum runtime
and classical energy consumption to quantum energy consumption under different problem parameters. Blue regions
indicate a possible quantum advantage. (c) & (d): Runtime and energy comparison between quantum and classical
algorithms, assuming condition number and sparsity scale as log2(N), andϵto be 0.01. (e): Runtime and qubit
count scaling for the quantum algorithm over larger matrix sizes.
not explicitly addressed T rotterization, our work pro-
vides the first comprehensive error analysis that accounts
for both error sources simultaneously . Through mathe-
matical derivation, we obtained an exact upper bound
for the total error and found that this bound is signifi-cantly higher than the average-case error. T o refine this
analysis, we conducted numerical experiments to give a
probabilistic bound, revealing that the expected cost of
the HHL algorithm is substantially lower than its worst-
case estimate.

--- PDF page 5 ---
5
Based on our error estimation, we determined the re-
quired number of HS1 repetitions for specific input cases.
The gate count per HS1 operation was obtained from our
earlier code implementation. Since T-gates represent the
primary resource bottleneck in our analysis, we focus on
tracking only the T-gate count. The total number of T-
gates required is given by the product of the total number
of HS1 invocations and the T-gate count per HS1 opera-
tion, which give us result as shown in 1.
After determining the number of logical qubits and
logicalT-gates required by the algorithm, the next step
is to translate these logical resources into the fault-
tolerant physical resource under a quantum error cor-
rection (QEC) scheme. Among the various existing QEC
schemes, we adopt the surface code in this study as it has
the highest fault tolerant error threshold, and has been
demonstrated by recent experiments [24].
In essence, when executing quantum algorithms using
the surface code model, physical qubits are categorized
into data blocks and distillation blocks. Data blocks are
responsible for storing logical qubits and consuming the
so-called ”magic states,” while distillation blocks gener-
ate these magic states. Each time a data block con-
sumes a magic state produced by a distillation block,
aT-gate operation is executed. Consequently , the to-
tal physical qubit count is simply the sum of physical
qubits in the data and distillation blocks. The runtime of
surface code-based quantum computing is approximately
given by the number of T-gates divided by their execution
speed, which is determined by the specific configuration
of data and distillation blocks as well as the hardware
parameters of the quantum computer.
T o determine the physical qubit count and runtime, it
is essential to establish an optimal configuration of data
and distillation blocks. Our goal is to find a configura-
tion that minimizes the space-time volume, defined as
the product of the number of physical qubits and the
runtime. Achieving this requires considering several con-
straints and trade-offs, which are listed as follows:
• The distillation block must be large enough to
achieve the desired T-state error rate.
• The code distance of the surface code must be large
enough to achieve the desired logical error rate.
• The data block’s eﬀiciency to consume magic states
comes at a price of using more physicla qubits.
• The distillation block’s eﬀiciency to produce magic
states comes at a price of using more physical
qubits.
W e use the procedure proposed in [13] to optimize
space-time volume under such considerations. The pro-
cedure includes 4 steps:
1. Determine the distillation protocol. W e select
the most cost-effective distillation protocol that
achieves the required T-state error rate.2. Construct a minimal setup. W e design the space-
optimal protocol.
3. Determine the code distance. W e identify the min-
imum code distance that ensures the error rate re-
mains below the threshold.
4. Add distillation blocks. Building on the space-
optimal protocol, we incrementally adopt data
block and distillation block protocols with larger
space overhead but reduced time overhead until the
optimal space-time cost is achieved.
W e implemented these four steps in a script, which will
be further discussed in Appendix . By inputting the al-
gorithm’s logical T-gate count, logical qubits count, and
reasonably assumed quantum computer parameters (in-
cluding quantum gate fidelity , the number of physical
qubits, and clock frequency), the script identifies the con-
figuration of distillation and data blocks that minimizes
space-time volume. It then outputs the corresponding
runtime and physical qubits overhead.
So now we are only left with energy estimation. W e
use the model proposed in [15], where the primary energy
cost of quantum computers is cooling, and the energy
consumption grows with number of qubits because they
assume that a single refrigeration unit can accommodate
a limited number of qubits for super-conducting qubits.
As a result, the quantum computer’s power consumption
is proportional to the number of physical qubits. Now
we define the energy eﬀiciency as the power consump-
tion per qubit, we use the data provided by [16], where
they targeted at IBM Quantum System T wo’s dilution
refrigerator, the system houses 4158 physical qubits and
operates at a power of 27 KW, thus, in interms of single
qubit, the power eﬀiciency is 6.25 W atts.
These results provide an intuitive and detailed refer-
ence for end-to-end runtime estimation of the resources
required to run the QLSA algorithm and serve as a practi-
cal basis for developing QLSA-related applications. How-
ever, we emphasize that current quantum computers are
far from being capable of running the HHL algorithm,
and future quantum hardware may differ significantly
from existing systems. Also, there has been significant
progress in the QLSA algorithm, such that the algorithm
we are esitmating may not be the optimal. Therefore,
the specific results we provide should be viewed as rough
baseline predictions based on the current state of quan-
tum computing technology .
B. Classical part
In this work, we address two classical linear system
solver: the conjugate gradient (CG) method and the
Cholesky decomposition (CD) method. W e mainly fo-
cus on former as CG is generally considere as the classi-
cal cournterparat of QLSA due to its iterative nature and
ability to handle sparse and well-conditioned systems. on

--- PDF page 6 ---
6
the other hand, the CD method is not a direct correspon-
dence to QLSA as it is deterministic with no dependence
onϵ, however CD is more often used in supercomputers
and we include it in D.
F or detailed derivation of the resource cost for boths
methods we refer readers to appendix D.
IV. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this work, we perform an end-to-end resource esti-
mation of the HHL algorithm in terms of time, space, and
energy . Unlike existing resource estimations, including
[5], our work provides a detailed analysis of fault toler-
ance based on surface codes. Moreover, we precisely ad-
dress energy sustainability by employing physical models
of superconducting quantum devices. Our findings con-
firm that quantum computing will indeed have an energy
advantage at a large scale based on current supercon-
ducting quantum technologies, resolving a long-standing
concern about the energy sustainability of quantum com-
puting in practical applications [7, 8]. Other innovative
aspects of our work include a detailed comparison be-
tween quantum and classical approaches to solving linear
systems and matrix inversion, an analysis of theoretical
upper bounds versus practical average cases, and a quan-
tum circuit simulator for end-to-end HHL algorithms, the
details of which are summarized in the Supplementary
Materials.
Although we confirm that potential quantum advan-
tages might appear at the scale of 235∼250matrix sizes
and105physical qubits, the practical costs could be lower
due to the overestimation of resource counts in the T rot-
ter simulation. Moreover, smarter designs for quantum
error correction and energy-sustainable innovations in
quantum hardware might further enhance performance.On the other hand, compared to other resource estima-
tions of quantum algorithms in different domains (such as
cryptography used for digital signatures and blockchains
[25]), the HHL algorithm appears to achieve potential
quantum advantages with a smaller number of physical
qubits [25]. However, better designs, including quantum
memories, might further improve the capabilities of cryp-
tographically relevant quantum computers [26].
Our work presents significant opportunities for bring-
ing quantum computing into practice. F or example, we
do not address the uploading and downloading challenges
of the HHL algorithm, which may be critical for data-
intensive applications. Active developments are under-
way on both the hardware side [27] and the system de-
sign side [28, 29] toward large-scale and error-resilient
QRAMs [18] in promising hardware platforms such as
circuit/cavity QED/QAD [27]. Notably , since QRAM
circuits are classically simulatable, precise estimates of
QRAM costs can be investigated on a large scale [18].
Moreover, for the downloading process, a detailed classi-
fication of quantum computing user needs may be essen-
tial. If quantum customers are classical, what will classi-
cal customers require? The first few elements of the state
|x⟩? Some expectation value of operators [20]? Other im-
portant directions include further exploration of energy
sustainability . Can we provide energy estimations for
other hardware, such as neutral-atom quantum comput-
ers? Can we make device-independent statements about
energy advantages? Can we generalize such estimations
to a broader range of quantum algorithms? Finally , it
would also be interesting to investigate more advanced
versions of quantum algorithms [30–34] and classical al-
gorithms [14], as well as improved designs for quantum
error correction codes [35–37] and quantum memories
[26].
[1] Michael A Nielsen and Isaac L Chuang. Quantum compu-
tation and quantum information . Cambridge university
press, 2010.
[2] Peter W Shor. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime fac-
torization and discrete logarithms on a quantum com-
puter. SIAM review , 41(2):303–332, 1999.
[3] Lov K Grover. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm
for database search. In Proceedings of the twenty-eighth
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , pages
212–219, 1996.
[4] Seth Lloyd. Universal quantum simulators. Science ,
273(5278):1073–1078, 1996.
[5] David Jennings, Matteo Lostaglio, Sam Pallister, An-
drew T Sornborger, and Yiğit Subaşı. Eﬀicient quantum
linear solver algorithm with detailed running costs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.11352 , 2023.
[6] Alexander M Dalzell, B David Clader, Grant Salton,
Mario Berta, Cedric Y en-Y u Lin, David A Bader, Niki-
tas Stamatopoulos, Martin JA Schuetz, F ernando GSL
Brandão, Helmut G Katzgraber, et al. End-to-end re-source analysis for quantum interior-point methods and
portfolio optimization. PRX Quantum , 4(4):040325,
2023.
[7] Alexia Auffèves. Quantum technologies need a quantum
energy initiative. PRX Quantum , 3(2):020101, 2022.
[8] T ravis L Scholten, Carl J Williams, Dustin Moody ,
Michele Mosca, William Hurley , William J Zeng,
Matthias T royer, Jay M Gambetta, et al. Assessing the
benefits and risks of quantum computers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.16317 , 2024.
[9] John Preskill. Beyond NISQ: The Megaquop Machine ,
Q2B 2024.
[10] Aram W Harrow, A vinatan Hassidim, and Seth Lloyd.
Quantum algorithm for linear systems of equations.
Physical review letters , 103(15):150502, 2009.
[11] Danial Dervovic, Mark Herbster, Peter Mountney , Si-
mone Severini, Naïri Usher, and Leonard W ossnig. Quan-
tum linear systems algorithms: a primer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.08227 , 2018.
[12] Andrew M Childs, Y uan Su, Minh C T ran, Nathan

--- PDF page 7 ---
7
Wiebe, and Shuchen Zhu. Theory of trotter error with
commutator scaling. Physical Review X , 11(1):011020,
2021.
[13] Daniel Litinski. A game of surface codes: Large-scale
quantum computing with lattice surgery . Quantum ,
3:128, 2019.
[14] Magnus R. Hestenes and Eduard Stiefel. Methods of con-
jugate gradients for solving linear systems. Journal of
Research of the National Bureau of Standards , 49(6):409–
436, 1952.
[15] Michael James Martin, Caroline Hughes, Gilberto
Moreno, Eric B. Jones, David Sickinger, Sreekant Naru-
manchi, and Ray Grout. Energy use in quantum data
centers: Scaling the impact of computer architecture,
qubit performance, size, and thermal parameters, 2021.
[16] Edward Parker and Michael JD V ermeer. Estimat-
ing the energy requirements to operate a cryptana-
lytically relevant quantum computer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.14344 , 2023.
[17] Vittorio Giovannetti, Seth Lloyd, and Lorenzo Maccone.
Quantum random access memory . Physical review letters ,
100(16):160501, 2008.
[18] Connor T Hann, Gideon Lee, SM Girvin, and Liang
Jiang. Resilience of quantum random access memory to
generic noise. Prx Quantum , 2(2):020311, 2021.
[19] Scott Aaronson. Read the fine print. Nature Physics ,
11(4):291–293, 2015.
[20] Hsin-Y uan Huang, Richard Kueng, and John Preskill.
Predicting many properties of a quantum system from
very few measurements. Nature Physics , 16(10):1050–
1057, 2020.
[21] Junyu Liu, Minzhao Liu, Jin-Peng Liu, Ziyu Y e, Y unfei
W ang, Y uri Alexeev, Jens Eisert, and Liang Jiang. T o-
wards provably eﬀicient quantum algorithms for large-
scale machine-learning models. Nature Communications ,
15(1):434, 2024.
[22] Jin-Peng Liu, Herman Øie Kolden, Hari K. Krovi,
Nuno F. Loureiro, Konstantina T rivisa, and Andrew M.
Childs. Eﬀicient quantum algorithm for dissipative non-
linear differential equations. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences , 118(35), August 2021.
[23] Junyu Liu, Minzhao Liu, Jin-Peng Liu, Ziyu Y e, Y unfei
W ang, Y uri Alexeev, Jens Eisert, and Liang Jiang. T o-
wards provably eﬀicient quantum algorithms for large-
scale machine-learning models. Nature Communications ,
15(1), January 2024.
[24] Rajeev Acharya, Laleh Aghababaie-Beni, Igor Aleiner,
T rond I. Andersen, Markus Ansmann, F rank Arute,
Kunal Arya, Abraham Asfaw, Nikita Astrakhantsev,
Juan Atalaya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, Brian Bal-
lard, Joseph C. Bardin, Johannes Bausch, Andreas
Bengtsson, Alexander Bilmes, Sam Blackwell, Sergio
Boixo, Gina Bortoli, Alexandre Bourassa, Jenna Bovaird,
Leon Brill, Michael Broughton, David A. Browne, Brett
Buchea, Bob B. Buckley , David A. Buell, Tim Burger,
Brian Burkett, Nicholas Bushnell, Anthony Cabrera,
Juan Campero, Hung-Shen Chang, Y u Chen, Zijun
Chen, Ben Chiaro, Desmond Chik, Charina Chou, Ja-
han Claes, Agnetta Y. Cleland, Josh Cogan, Roberto
Collins, Paul Conner, William Courtney , Alexander L.
Crook, Ben Curtin, Sayan Das, Alex Davies, Laura De
Lorenzo, Dripto M. Debroy , Sean Demura, Michel De-
voret, Agustin Di Paolo, Paul Donohoe, Ilya Droz-
dov, Andrew Dunsworth, Clint Earle, Thomas Edlich,Alec Eickbusch, A viv Moshe Elbag, Mahmoud Elzouka,
Catherine Erickson, Lara F aoro, Edward F arhi, Vini-
cius S. F erreira, Leslie Flores Burgos, Ebrahim F orati,
Austin G. F owler, Brooks F oxen, Suhas Ganjam, Gon-
zalo Garcia, Robert Gasca, Élie Genois, William Giang,
Craig Gidney , Dar Gilboa, Raja Gosula, Alejandro Gra-
jales Dau, Dietrich Graumann, Alex Greene, Jonathan A.
Gross, Steve Habegger, John Hall, Michael C. Hamilton,
Monica Hansen, Matthew P . Harrigan, Sean D. Har-
rington, F rancisco J. H. Heras, Stephen Heslin, Paula
Heu, Oscar Higgott, Gordon Hill, Jeremy Hilton, George
Holland, Sabrina Hong, Hsin-Y uan Huang, Ashley Huff,
William J. Huggins, Lev B. Ioffe, Sergei V. Isakov,
Justin Iveland, Evan Jeffrey , Zhang Jiang, Cody Jones,
Stephen Jordan, Chaitali Joshi, Pavol Juhas, Dvir Kafri,
Hui Kang, Amir H. Karamlou, Kostyantyn Kechedzhi,
Julian Kelly , T rupti Khaire, T anuj Khattar, Mostafa
Khezri, Seon Kim, Paul V. Klimov, Andrey R. Klots,
Bryce Kobrin, Pushmeet Kohli, Alexander N. Korotkov,
F edor Kostritsa, Robin Kothari, Borislav Kozlovskii,
John Mark Kreikebaum, Vladislav D. Kurilovich, Nathan
Lacroix, David Landhuis, Tiano Lange-Dei, Brandon W.
Langley , Pavel Laptev, Kim-Ming Lau, Loïck Le Guevel,
Justin Ledford, Kenny Lee, Y uri D. Lensky , Shannon
Leon, Brian J. Lester, Wing Y an Li, Yin Li, Alexan-
der T. Lill, W ayne Liu, William P . Livingston, Aditya
Locharla, Erik Lucero, Daniel Lundahl, Aaron Lunt, Sid
Madhuk, Fionn D. Malone, Ashley Maloney , Salvatore
Mandrá, Leigh S. Martin, Steven Martin, Orion Martin,
Cameron Maxfield, Jarrod R. McClean, Matt McEwen,
Seneca Meeks, Anthony Megrant, Xiao Mi, Kevin C.
Miao, Amanda Mieszala, Reza Molavi, Sebastian Molina,
Shirin Montazeri, Alexis Morvan, Ramis Movassagh,
W ojciech Mruczkiewicz, Ofer Naaman, Matthew Nee-
ley , Charles Neill, Ani Nersisyan, Hartmut Neven,
Michael Newman, Jiun How Ng, Anthony Nguyen,
Murray Nguyen, Chia-Hung Ni, Thomas E. O’Brien,
William D. Oliver, Alex Opremcak, Kristoffer Ottos-
son, Andre Petukhov, Alex Pizzuto, John Platt, Re-
becca Potter, Orion Pritchard, Leonid P . Pryadko, Chris
Quintana, Ganesh Ramachandran, Matthew J. Reagor,
David M. Rhodes, Gabrielle Roberts, Eliott Rosen-
berg, Emma Rosenfeld, Pedram Roushan, Nicholas C.
Rubin, Negar Saei, Daniel Sank, Kannan Sankarago-
mathi, Kevin J. Satzinger, Henry F. Schurkus, Christo-
pher Schuster, Andrew W. Senior, Michael J. Shearn,
Aaron Shorter, Noah Shutty , Vladimir Shvarts, Shrad-
dha Singh, V olodymyr Sivak, Jindra Skruzny , Spencer
Small, V adim Smelyanskiy , W. Clarke Smith, Rolando D.
Somma, Sofia Springer, George Sterling, Doug Strain,
Jordan Suchard, Aaron Szasz, Alex Sztein, Douglas
Thor, Alfredo T orres, M. Mert T orunbalci, Abeer V aish-
nav, Justin V argas, Sergey V dovichev, Guifre Vidal, Ben-
jamin Villalonga, Catherine V ollgraff Heidweiller, Steven
W altman, Shannon X. W ang, Brayden W are, Kate W e-
ber, Theodore White, Kristi W ong, Bryan W. K. W oo,
Cheng Xing, Z. Jamie Y ao, Ping Y eh, Bicheng Ying, Juh-
wan Y oo, Noureldin Y osri, Grayson Y oung, Adam Zal-
cman, Y axing Zhang, Ningfeng Zhu, and Nicholas Zo-
brist. Quantum error correction below the surface code
threshold, 2024.
[25] Daniel Litinski. How to compute a 256-bit elliptic curve
private key with only 50 million toffoli gates. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.08585 , 2023.

--- PDF page 8 ---
8
[26] Élie Gouzien and Nicolas Sangouard. F actoring 2048-bit
rsa integers in 177 days with 13 436 qubits and a mul-
timode memory . Physical review letters , 127(14):140503,
2021.
[27] Connor T Hann, Chang-Ling Zou, Y axing Zhang, Yi-
wen Chu, Robert J Schoelkopf, Steven M Girvin, and
Liang Jiang. Hardware-eﬀicient quantum random access
memory with hybrid quantum acoustic systems. Physical
review letters , 123(25):250501, 2019.
[28] DK W eiss, Shifan Xu, Shruti Puri, Y ongshan Ding, and
Steven M Girvin. F aulty towers: recovering a function-
ing quantum random access memory in the presence of
defective routers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15612 , 2024.
[29] Y unfei W ang, Y uri Alexeev, Liang Jiang, F rederic T
Chong, and Junyu Liu. F undamental causal bounds of
quantum random access memories. npj Quantum Infor-
mation , 10(1):71, 2024.
[30] Andris Ambainis. V ariable time amplitude amplification
and a faster quantum algorithm for solving systems of
linear equations, 2010.
[31] Andrew M. Childs, Robin Kothari, and Rolando D.
Somma. Quantum algorithm for systems of linear equa-
tions with exponentially improved dependence on preci-
sion. SIAM J. Comp. , 46(6):1920–1950, January 2017.
[32] Guang Hao Low and Y uan Su. Quantum linear system
algorithm with optimal queries to initial state prepara-
tion, 2024.
[33] Pedro C. S. Costa, Dong An, Y uval R. Sanders, Y uan Su,
Ryan Babbush, and Dominic W. Berry . Optimal scaling
quantum linear systems solver via discrete adiabatic the-
orem, 2021.
[34] Alexander M. Dalzell. A shortcut to an optimal quantum
linear system solver, 2024.
[35] Sergey Bravyi, Andrew W Cross, Jay M Gambetta,
Dmitri Maslov, Patrick Rall, and Theodore J Y oder.
High-threshold and low-overhead fault-tolerant quantum
memory . Nature , 627(8005):778–782, 2024.
[36] Qian Xu, J Pablo Bonilla Ataides, Christopher A Pat-
tison, Nithin Raveendran, Dolev Bluvstein, Jonathan
W urtz, Bane V asić, Mikhail D Lukin, Liang Jiang, and
Hengyun Zhou. Constant-overhead fault-tolerant quan-
tum computation with reconfigurable atom arrays. Na-
ture Physics , pages 1–7, 2024.
[37] Joshua Viszlai, Willers Y ang, Sophia F uhui Lin, Junyu
Liu, Natalia Nottingham, Jonathan M Baker, and F red-
eric T Chong. Matching generalized-bicycle codes to
neutral atoms for low-overhead fault-tolerance. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.16980 , 2023.
[38] Dominic W. Berry , Graeme Ahokas, Richard Cleve, and
Barry C. Sanders. Eﬀicient quantum algorithms for sim-
ulating sparse hamiltonians. Communications in Mathe-
matical Physics , 270(2):359–371, December 2006.
[39] John Preskill. Reliable quantum computers. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences , 454(1969):385–410,
January 1998.
[40] Barbara M. T erhal. Quantum error correction for quan-
tum memories. Rev. Mod. Phys. , 87:307–346, Apr 2015.
[41] Earl T. Campbell, Barbara M. T erhal, and Christophe
V uillot. Roads towards fault-tolerant universal quan-
tum computation. Nature , 549(7671):172–179, Septem-
ber 2017.
[42] A.Y u. Kitaev. F ault-tolerant quantum computation by
anyons. Annals of Physics , 303(1):2–30, January 2003.[43] Austin G. F owler, Matteo Mariantoni, John M. Martinis,
and Andrew N. Cleland. Surface codes: T owards prac-
tical large-scale quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A ,
86:032324, Sep 2012.
[44] Y ousef Saad. Iterative methods for sparse linear systems.
SIAM, 2003.
[45] Jonathan R Shewchuk. An introduction to the conjugate
gradient method without the agonizing pain. T echni-
cal report, Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh, P A,
USA, 1994.
[46] TOP500.org. T op500 list - november 2024, November
2024.
[47] Wikipedia contributors. Processor power dissipation,
2024. [Online; accessed 4-F ebruary-2025].

--- PDF page 9 ---
9
Supplemental Material
Appendix A: QLSA algorithm implementation
1. A brief introduction to QLSA
The Quantum Linear Systems Algorithm (QLSA) is a quantum algorithm designed to solve systems of linear
equations eﬀiciently . It relies on principles of quantum mechanics to provide a possible superpolynomial advantage
for specific cases compared to classical methods.
The core idea is to represent the solution to a linear system Ax=bin the quantum state |x⟩, whereA is a sparse
and well-conditioned matrix. The algorithm involves several key steps:
• Preparation of the Input State: The algorithm starts with the quantum encoding of the input vector |b⟩
into a quantum state.
• Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE): QPE approximate the eigenvalues of the matrix A by estimating the
phase of the unitary eiAt. Such unitary is implemented using the T rotter decomposition method.
• Matrix Inversion: The eigenvalues of A are inverted conditionally , enabling the construction of the quantum
state corresponding to the solution.
• Measurement: Finally , measurements are performed to extract information about the solution vector.
QLSA’s eﬀiciency is highly dependent on the sparsity and condition number of the matrix A, making it particularly
useful for problems where these constraints are satisfied
2. Resource bottleneck in QLSA
A significant computational bottleneck in the QLSA arises from the repetitive application of one-sparse Hamiltonian
simulation, which is a fundamental component of the algorithm. This challenge emerges due to the following reasons:
• Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE): The QPE step requires the Hamiltonian simulation of A, which is an
s-sparse matrix, to be applied multiple times to achieve suﬀicient precision. The repetition ensures the accurate
estimation of eigenvalues, which directly affects the correctness of the algorithm.
• Simulation of s-Sparse Hamiltonians: T o implement the simulation of s-sparse Hamiltonians, the T rotter
decomposition method is often employed. However, this approach introduces further overhead, as it decomposes
thes-sparse Hamiltonian into a series of one-sparse Hamiltonians.
• One-Sparse Hamiltonian Simulation: Eachs-sparse Hamiltonian simulation requires the repetitive appli-
cation of one-sparse Hamiltonian simulations. This nested structure compounds the computational cost, making
one-sparse Hamiltonian simulation a critical bottleneck for resource eﬀiciency .
In essence, the hierarchical nature of the QLSA—where QPE requires multiple iterations of s-sparse simulations,
ands-sparse Hamiltonian simulations depend on repeatedly applying a series of one-sparse simulations—highlights
the algorithm’s computational resource bottleneck.
Therefore, our resource estimation focuses solely on the one-sparse Hamiltonian simulations, reducing the overall
resource estimation to (1) the number of one-sparse Hamiltonian simulations. (2) the resource cost of each one-sparse
Hamiltonian simulation. Next we will discuss the resource cost of each one-sparse Hamiltonian simulation by giving
a concrete code implementation of such step. W e left the analysis for number of one-sparse Hamiltonian simulation
in the error analysis section.
3. One-sparse Hamiltonian simulation implementation
In general, directly implementing the unitary eiHtis infeasible because H is an extremely large matrix, and com-
puting its exponential is highly complex. Here we use the methods in [38]. The core idea for implementing eiHtrelies

--- PDF page 10 ---
10
on the unitary conjugation theorem , which states that for a matrix exponential of the form eiUHU†, it is equivalent
toUeiHU†.
Thus, if we can decompose H into the form U1U2...H′...U†
2U†
1, where each UiandeiH′tcan be eﬀiciently
implemented, we effectively achieve the implementation of eiHt.
In the following, we first explain the decomposition process and then discuss the implementation of the resulting
unitary operations.
Lemma 1. F or a one-sparse Hermitian matrix H with real valued entries, it can be decomposed into the form (we
ignore the tensor with identity matrix):
H=M(T⊗F)M†(A1)
whereM is the oracle, T is the swap operator on two registers, and F is diagonal operator, specifical ly:
M|x⟩|0⟩|0⟩|0⟩=|x⟩|m(x)⟩|0⟩|w(x)⟩ (A2)
T|x⟩|y⟩=|y⟩|x⟩ (A3)
F|x⟩=x|x⟩ (A4)
Proof. Suppose the x’s column of H has the non-zero element w(x)at position m(x), then we have:
H|x⟩=w(x)|m(x)⟩.
Thus to construct the operator H, is equivalent to mimic such behavior. W e can achieve this by the following steps:
1. ApplyM to|x⟩and the ancilla:
|x⟩|0⟩|0⟩|0⟩M− → |x⟩|m(x)⟩|0⟩|w(x)⟩.
2. ApplyT=A†ZA :
T− → |m(x)⟩|x⟩|0⟩|w(x)⟩.
3. ApplyF:
F− →w(x)|m(x)⟩|x⟩|0⟩|w(x)⟩.
4. ApplyM†:
M†
− − →w(x)|m(x)⟩|x⊕m(m(x))⟩|0⟩|w(x)⊕w(m(x))⟩=w(x)|m(x)⟩|0⟩|0⟩|0⟩.
ThusH is equivalent to M(T⊗F)M†.
Now we are left to implement eiTtandeiFt. Later, we will see that eiFtcan be directly implemented. F or eiTt, we
have to apply unitary conjugation again:
Lemma 2. F or a swap operator T, it can be decomposed into the form:
T=nO
l=1Wl,n+lnO
l=1El,n+lnO
l=1Wl,n+l=˜W˜E˜W.
whereW andE are two qubits operators with the fol lowing matrix representation:
W=2
6641 0 0 0
01√
21√
20
01√
2−1√
20
0 0 0 13
775E=2
641 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0−1 0
0 0 0 13
75.
Proof. Notice that T is equivalent to the swap operator on npairs of qubits, i.e., T=Nn
l=1Sl,n+l. By diagonalizing
S, we obtain WEW , which completes the proof.

--- PDF page 11 ---
11
n
n
3r|x⟩
|0⟩ |0⟩
|0⟩ |0⟩
|0⟩ |0⟩M˜W
˜T ˜T†˜W
M†eiHt|x⟩
eiZt
eiFt
FIG. 2: Quantum circuit for one sparse Hamiltonian simulation.
Again the operator ˜E has to be decomposed, notice that the behavior ofNn
l=1El,n+lis just compute the parity of
xiyi, and add a phase 1 for even parity , and -1 for odd parity . This can be implemented by using nT offli-like gates
to compute the parity and store in an ancilla qubit, and then apply Z gate to the ancilla. This gives us:
Lemma 3. F or ˜E=Nn
l=1El,n+l, it can be decomposed into the form:
˜E=˜TfZ˜Tf†
where ˜Tfare set of T offli-like gates that is used to compute the parity, Z isZ-gate on parity qubit.
By lemma 1, 2, and 3, we have the following theorem:
Theorem 1. F or a one-sparse Hermitian matrix H with real valued entries, eiHtcan be implemented by:
eiHt=M˜W˜Tf(eiZt⊗eiFt)˜Tf†˜W†M†.
Proof. By lemma 1, we have:
eiHt=eiM(T⊗F)M†t=Mei(T⊗F)tM†.
By lemma 2, we have:
ei(T⊗F)t=ei˜W˜E˜Wt=˜Wei˜Et˜W†.
By lemma 3, we have:
ei˜Et=ei˜TfCZ˜Tf†t=˜Tf(CeiZt⊗eiFt)˜Tf†.
Alltogether, we have:
eiHt=M˜W˜Tf(CeiZt⊗eiFt)˜Tf†˜WM†.
The corresponding quantum circuit for theorem 1 is shown in Figure 2.
In the quantum circuit 2, the oracle M is taken as assumption and we do not count into resource estimation, eiZt
is a single qubit rotation gate. Next we’ll discuss the implementation of the operators ˜W ,˜T, andeiFt.
a. Implementation of eiFt
The behavior of eiFtis to apply a phase eiλtto the state |λ⟩, where |λ⟩is the binary representation of the value λ.
Supposingλis greater than 0, we have:
eiλt|λ⟩=ei∑n
j=12λ
jt|λ1···λn⟩ (A5)
=ei2λ
1t|λ1⟩ ⊗ei2λ
2t|λ2⟩ ⊗ ··· ⊗ei2λ
nt|λn⟩. (A6)
Thus we can implement eiFtby applying phase gate ei2λ
iton each of the qubit |λi⟩.
In order to allow negative λ, we have to add another ancilla |p⟩to indicate the sign, and making the rotation
direction of the phase gates controlled by the ancilla. The corresponding circuit is shown in Figure 3.
F or each controlled phase gate, we can implement it by using the circuit shown in Figure 4.

--- PDF page 12 ---
12
|p⟩
|an−1⟩
...
|a1⟩
|a0⟩e2n−1ite2n−1it
e2ite−2it
eite−it
FIG. 3: Quantum circuit for eiFt.
|p⟩
|a⟩Rz(λ
2)
Rz(λ
2) Rz(−λ
2)
FIG. 4: Controlled phase gate.
b. Implementation of ˜W
Since ˜W=Nn
l=1Wl,n+l,˜W is just apply W onnpairs of qubits, the circuit is shown in Figure 5. Now for each
W , since it has the matrix representation 2, we can implement it using the quantum circuit shown in 6.
c. Implementation of ˜T
The operator ˜T computes the parity of each pair xiyiand stores the result in an ancilla qubit. This can be
implemented using T offoli-like gates to compute the parity of each pair xiyi. The corresponding quantum circuit is
shown in Figure 7.
4. Logical resource count
Now we have a concret implementation of one sparse Hamiltonian simulation, we can count the logical resource by
adding up the cost of each component. The logical resource is defined as the number of logical qubits and the number
ofClifford +T gates.
n
n|x⟩
|y⟩˜W =...x1
W
y1
xn
W
yn
FIG. 5: Quantum circuit implementing the swap operator ˜W .

--- PDF page 13 ---
13
W =
H
=
S H T T†H S†
FIG. 6: Quantum circuit implementing the gate W .
n
n|x⟩
|y⟩
|0⟩˜Tf =...x1
y1
x2
y2
xn
yn
0
FIG. 7: Quantum circuit implementing the swap operator T.
|q1⟩
|q2⟩
|q3⟩T
T†T†S
H T†T T†T H
FIG. 8: Quantum circuit implementing the T offli-like gate.
Component T gates CNOT S H Explanation
˜W 4n 10n 4n 4n 2˜W gates, each contains n W gates, and each W gate
requires 2 T gates, 5 CNOT gates, 2 S gates and 2 H
gates
˜T 14n 12n 2n 4n 2˜T gates, each contains n T offoli-like gates, and each
T offoli-like gate requires 7 T gates, 6 CNOT gates, 1 S
gate and 2 H gates.
eiZt15 0 3 3 Assumes, on average, the rotation gates consume 15 T
gates, 3 Sgates and H gates.
eiFt90r 4r 6r 6r 2rcontrolled rotation gates, each contains 2 CNOT gate
and 3 rotation gates.
T otal 18n+ 90r+ 15 22n+ 4r6n+ 6r+ 3 8n+ 6r+ 3 Summing up all the components.
T ABLE I: Logical T gate count for each component in the algorithm.

--- PDF page 14 ---
14
Thus we have the following theorem:
Theorem 2. F or a one-sparse Hermitian matrix H with real valued entries, the gate count of the quantum circuit
implementing eiHtis given by:
Tcount = 90r+ 18n+ 15,
CNOT count = 22n+ 4r,
Scount = 6n+ 6r+ 3,
Hcount = 8n+ 6r+ 3.
whereris the number of precision bits, nis the number of qubits for input state vector |x⟩.
Appendix B: Scaling analysis
In this section, we derive the exact scaling of the QLSA algorithm. As mentioned in A 2, the bottleneck of the QLSA
algorithm lies in the number of one-sparse Hamiltonian simulations (nHS1) we have to perform. This is determined
by two factors:
1. The number of one-sparse Hamiltonian simulations required to implement the s-sparse Hamiltonian simulation
(the unitary).
2. The number of unitaries (the number of clock qubits, nC) in the quantum phase estimation.
It is crucial to recognize that the QLSA algorithm is essentially an iterative method. T o suppress the error to a
certain level, we need to perform the subroutine for a specific number of iterations. Thus, analyzing the scaling of
the QLSA algorithm is equivalent to bounding the error.
The error of the QLSA algorithm is mainly introduced by two parts: the error introduced by the T rotterization
and the error introduced by the Quantum F ourier T ransform (QFT). Previous error analyses mainly focused on the
latter, and a comprehensive error analysis of both parts has not been provided. Here, we will provide a detailed error
analysis of the QLSA algorithm.
The main idea to bound the error of both parts simultaneously is to use an exponential-type error to express the
error introduced by T rotterization. W e define the Exponential Type Error (ETE) as
ETE :=∥˜A−A∥. (B1)
This error measure quantifies the deviation in the exponent matrix of the Hamiltonian evolution, which can be
viewed as the error of the input. Thus, we can separate the error analysis of T rotterization and QFT, and then add
the errors together.
Next, we first derive the exponential-type error of T rotterization, followed by the error of QFT. The derivation
is heavily inspired by [12]. Although the paper does not provide an exact error bound for exponential-type error,
it provides the main idea of how to derive the error bound. Therefore, it is relatively straightforward to derive it
ourselves. W e start with:
f(t) =eiH1teiH2t···eiHnt(B2)
Since f(t) is a unitary operator, we have:
f(t) =eiH′t(B3)
and we want to bound:
∥H′−H∥
∥H∥(B4)
Given in the paper, we have:
f(t) = expTZt
0dτ(iH+E(τ))
(B5)

--- PDF page 15 ---
15
T aking to 1st order in the dysen series expansion of (B5), we have:
f(t) =I+iHt+Zt
0dτE(τ) +O(t2) (B6)
Also taking 1st order tyler expansion of (B3), we have:
f(t) =I+iH′t+O(t2) (B7)
Comparing (B6) and (B7), we have:
H′=H+1
itZt
0dτE(τ) (B8)
Thus:
∥H′−H∥=1
tZt
0dτE(τ)(B9)
In order to get E(τ), we differentiate f(t), get:
df(t)
dt= (iH1+eiH1t(iH2)e−iH1t+...+eiH1t...eiHn−1t(iHn)e−iHn−1t...e−iH1t)f(t)
= (nX
j=1(j−1Y
k=1eiHk)(iHjt)(1Y
k=j−1e−iHkt))f(t)
= (nX
j=1Sj(t))f(t) (B10)
where:
Sj(t) = (j−1Y
k=1eiHkt)(iHj)(1Y
k=j−1eiHkt) (B11)
Now we have:
df(t)
dt= (iH+E(t))f(t) = (nX
j=1Sj(t))f(t) (B12)
E(t) =nX
j=1Sj(t)−iH (B13)
Next we will separate iHj fromSj(t), the way to achieve this is by recursive expansion. W e start with the innermost
term. By fundamental theorem of calculus, we have:
eiHj−1t(iHj)e−iHj−1t=iHj+Zt
0dτ(eiHj−1τ(iHj)e−iHj−1τ)′
=iHj+Zt
0dτeiHj−1τ[iHj−1,iHj]e−iHj−1τ
=iHj+Zt
0dτeiHj−1τ[Hj,Hj−1]e−iHj−1τ(B14)
F or the second layer, we have:

--- PDF page 16 ---
16
eiHj−2eiHj−1t(iHj)e−iHj−1te−iHj−2=eiHj−2t(iHj+Zt
0dτeiHj−1τ[Hj,Hj−1]e−iHj−1τ)e−iHj−2t
=eiHj−2tiHje−iHj−2t
+ (eiHj−2t)Zt
0dτeiHj−1τ[Hj,Hj−1]e−iHj−1τ(e−iHj−2t)
=iHj+Zt
0dτeiHj−2τ[Hj,Hj−2]e−iHj−2τ+
+ (eiHj−2t)Zt
0dτeiHj−1τ[Hj,Hj−1]e−iHj−1τ(e−iHj−2t) (B15)
Repeat this procedure until all the layers are expanded, we have:
Sj(t) = (j−1Y
k=1eiHkt)(iHj)(1Y
k=j−1eiHkt)
=iHj+j−1X
k=1(j−k−1Y
l=1eiHlt)Zt
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ(1Y
l=j−k−1e−iHjt) (B16)
Then substitute Sj(t)into (B13), we have:
E(t) =nX
j=1Sj(t)−iH
=nX
j=1j−1X
k=1(j−k−1Y
l=1eiHlt)Zt
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ(1Y
l=j−k−1e−iHjt) +nX
j=1iHj−iH
=nX
j=1j−1X
k=1(j−k−1Y
l=1eiHlt)Zt
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ(1Y
l=j−k−1e−iHjt) (B17)

--- PDF page 17 ---
17
Now with E(t)in hand, we can bound (B4) using triangle inequalities:
∥H′−H∥=1
tZt
0dτE(τ)
≤1
tZt
0dτ∥E(τ)∥
=1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1(j−k−1Y
l=1eiHlt1)Zt1
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ(1Y
l=j−k−1e−iHjt1)
≤1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1(j−k−1Y
l=1eiHlt1)Zt1
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ(1Y
l=j−k−1e−iHjt1)
=1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1Zt1
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ
≤1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1Zt1
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ
=1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1Zt1
0dτ∥[Hj,Hj−k]∥
≤1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1Zt1
0dτ2max m∥Hm∥2
=1
tn(n−1)
2t2
22max m∥Hm∥2
=n(n−1)t
2max m∥Hm∥2
(B18)
This bound is tight, as we can take example of n= 2,t= 0.2,H1 = [[1,0],[0,−1]] , andH2 = [[0,1],[1,0]] , the
bound and the actual error gives the same value 0.1. However, this bound is significantly above average, the intuition
behind this is that in (B13), the error term is a sum of all the commutators, and the commutators can cancel each
other, but the bound adds up the norm of all the commutators.
Intuitively this is similar to bounding the sum of random numbers, the bound is the number of random numbers
times the maximum of the random numbers.
So the better strategy here is to use probabilistic bound instead, where we tries to bound the error with failure rate
below certain threshold.
F rom the numerical result, we can see that the error does not depend on n. Thus, we can simply do the numerical
experiment on small matrix size, and take the upper bound around the edge of distribution, we have:
ϵ=∥t
r∥ (B19)
Where t is the time step and r is the trotter repetition. Now we have the probabilistic bound on the matrix norm,
we can transform it into error on xby applying the following formula:
∥∆x∥
∥x∥≤κ∥∆A∥
∥A∥
1−κ∥∆A∥
∥A∥(B20)
Since ∥A∥= 1 , and∥x∥= 1 , we have:
∥∆x∥ ≤κ∥∆A∥
1−κ∥∆A∥≤κt
r−κt(B21)

--- PDF page 18 ---
18
Trotter error distribution
00.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.160.180.20510152025
Commutator distribution
00.5 11.5 22.5 33.5 400.20.40.60.811.21.4Figure 1: Trotter error and commutator distributions
1
FIG. 9: T rotter error and commutator distribution.
∥∆x1∥ ≤r
20
3πk
t0(B22)
Under the constraint:
t0≤2πT⇒1
T≤1−2πκ
t0(B23)
Here,T represents the number of repetitive unitaries, which is 2 to the power of number of clock qubits, and t0is
the maximum evolution time, given by tT . These constraints ensure that the eigenvalues fall within the range of the
QPE estimation. F or simplicity , let’s assume t0=πT to meet the first constraint, and later we’ll see that the second
constraint is satisfied automatically . Then the error in this step is given by:
∥∆x2∥ ≤r
20
3k
T(B24)
Now let’s combine the error in both steps, by using the triangular inequality:
∥∆x∥=∥∆x1+ ∆x2∥ ≤ ∥ ∆x1∥+∥∆x2∥ (B25)
F or simplicity we let ∥∆x1≤ϵ
2and∥∆x2≤ϵ
2, then we have:
r≥2
ϵ+ 1
πκ≈2πκ
ϵ(B26)
T≥r
80
3κ
ϵ(B27)
Finally , we combine those two to get the number of HS1 operations needed:
nHS1=Trs≥q
320
3πκ2s
ϵ2(B28)
Where we assume that there are s number of HS1 per HS, this assumption requires that the oracle needs to
implement the seperation of an s-sparse matrix into s number of one sparse matrices, this does not hold in general,
but for applications with certain structures this can be done.

--- PDF page 19 ---
19
0 10 20 30 40 50
log(N) (assuming log(N) = k = s)0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5T otal Number of Gates1e9
 Scaling of Gate Counts with Respect to n
T gates
CNOT gates
S gates
H gates
FIG. 10: Scaling of the logical gates with respect to the problem size.
1. Logical resource scaling
In [appendix 1] we derived the scaling of the logical resource of each HS1 operation, and in this section we derived
the scaling of number of HS1 operations. By multiply both scaling together, we have the following theorem:
Theorem 3. The scaling of the logical gates is given by:
ngates =q
320
3πκ2s
ϵ2×HS1gates
Proof. The proof is straightforward, we just need to multiply the scaling of the logical resource of each HS1 operation
with the scaling of the number of HS1 operations.
Assuming (ϵ= 0.1,κ=s= log2N), we have the scaling of the different gates in plot 10.
Appendix C: Surface code protocol
1. Introduction to surface code
T o reliably store and process quantum information over extended periods, active error correction is essential. This is
achieved by encoding multiple physical qubits into logical qubits using quantum error-correcting codes [39–41]. Among
these, the surface code is not only the most widely used but also one of the most crucial due to its compatibility
with the locality constraints of practical quantum hardware, such as superconducting qubits, which only support
two-dimensional local operations [42, 43].
However, despite its importance and widespread adoption, the surface code introduces significant computational
overhead. The replacement of physical qubits with logical qubits drastically increases space requirements, while the
restriction to two-dimensional local operations imposes additional time costs. Arbitrary quantum gates may require
multiple time steps instead of executing in a single step, making the choice of surface code schemes—which define
parameters such as code distance, logical gate protocols, and resource allocation—critical in determining the actual
overhead.
T o accurately assess the resource demands of a quantum algorithm, it is essential to analyze the specific surface
code scheme under which it is executed. By optimizing these schemes, we can minimize space-time overhead and
better evaluate the feasibility of quantum computations within a surface-code-based architecture.

--- PDF page 20 ---
20
T ABLE II: Distillation Protocol Parameters
Protocol Number of Magic Tiles Production Time Error Rate Coeﬀicient (c)
15-1 11 11 35p3
116-12 44 9.27 4.125p4
225-1 176 5.5 1.5p7
2. Key concepts
a. Patch
A patch is a two-dimensional regular lattice of entangled physical qubits that serves as the substrate on which
logical qubits are defined. Physical qubits within a patch are categorized into two types:
• Data qubits : These qubits store quantum information and are measured less frequently , primarily during
computational operations.
• Syndrome qubits : These qubits interact repeatedly with neighboring data qubits and are frequently measured
to detect the presence of errors.
Logical qubits within a patch can perform logical operations (or gates) using a technique known as lattice surgery ,
which is beyond the scope of this discussion. The code distance, denoted as d, determines the error-correcting
capability of the patch. A patch of code distance dconsists of d2physical qubits, with larger values of dyielding
higher fidelity computations.
b. Blocks
Blocks are functional units that organize multiple patches according to specific rules. Blocks are categorized as
follows:
• Data blocks : These accommodate logical data qubits and execute logical operations, including logical gates.
• Distillation blocks : These are responsible for generating magic states , which are necessary for executing
certain non-Clifford gates.
F or Clifford gates, computations can be eﬀiciently performed within the data block. However, executing a T-gate
requires magic state resources, making it significantly more challenging. The distillation block produces magic states,
which are then consumed by the data block to enable T-gate operations. Since both processes rely on complex and
time-consuming protocols, T-gates become the primary bottleneck of quantum computation.
c. Protocols
Protocols define how patches within data blocks and distillation blocks are organized and how magic states are
produced and consumed. Protocol selection is crucial in optimizing the space-time trade-off of quantum computations.
• Distillation protocols : By allocating more patches to a distillation block, magic states can be generated more
quickly or with higher fidelity .
• Data block protocols : Increasing the number of patches in a data block enables faster consumption of magic
states, enhancing computational speed.
A comprehensive set of protocols is described in [13]. The parameters of these protocols are summarized in T able
II and III. Later in this work, we optimize the space-time cost of an algorithm with a given T-gate count and physical
parameters by selecting appropriate protocols.

--- PDF page 21 ---
21
T ABLE III: Data Protocol Parameters
Protocol Magic Consumption Time Number of Tiles per nQubits
Compact 9 1.5n+ 3
Intermediate 5 2n+ 4
F ast 1 2n+√
8n+ 1
d. Surface code scheme
A surface code scheme provides a complete description of a surface code implementation. It is defined by four key
parameters:
1. The code distance of the patches.
2. The data block protocol.
3. The distillation protocol.
4. The number of distillation blocks.
These parameters collectively determine the eﬀiciency and reliability of the quantum computation. By carefully
selecting and optimizing these elements, it is possible to achieve an optimal balance between resource utilization and
computational fidelity .
3. Surface-code-based physical resource estimator
The physical resource estimator is a function that takes the logical resource requirements and quantum computer
hardware parameters as inputs and outputs the surface code scheme with the lowest space-time cost. It also provides
the corresponding runtime and the number of physical qubits required.
F undamentally , finding the optimal surface code scheme is a constrained optimization problem. The primary
constraint is that both the magic state and the logical qubits must achieve a certain level of fidelity to ensure the
final error rate remains below a predefined threshold of 0.01. The objective of the optimization is to minimize the
space-time cost, which is defined as the product of runtime and the number of physical qubits. The optimization
parameters consist of four key aspects of the surface code scheme: the distillation protocol, the number of distillation
blocks, the data block protocol, and the code distance.
W e have implemented the optimization procedure outlined in [13] to determine the most eﬀicient surface code
scheme. The corresponding pseudocode can be found in 11.
The procedure consists of four steps, which we describe as follows:
a. Step 1: Determine the distil lation protocol
A more sophisticated distillation protocol produces magic states with higher fidelity but at the cost of using more
patches (and thus more physical qubits). The parameters of several distillation protocols are listed in [reference]. In
this step, our goal is to select the most cost-effective distillation protocol that achieves suﬀicient fidelity to keep the
overall computation error rate below 1
The fidelity threshold is defined as the error rate divided by the total number of T gates. W e simply choose the
least expensive distillation protocol that surpasses this fidelity threshold.
b. Step 2: Construct a minimal setup
In this step, we construct a surface code scheme that occupies the smallest possible space. While this minimal
setup is not optimal, it serves as a starting point to determine the code distance. Subsequent optimizations of the
data block protocol will build upon this minimal setup.

--- PDF page 22 ---
22
Algorithm 1 Optimal Surface Code Scheme
Input: (1) Logical qubit count Lqcount. (2) Number of T gates Tcount. (3)
Target logical error rate ϵ. (4) Quantum computer error rate p.
Output: Optimized surface code configuration S.
1:Step 1: Select Distillation Protocol
2:Fthreshold =ϵ
Tcount
3:LetTopt= min( T|F(T)< F threshold )
4:Step 2: Construct Minimal Setup
5:Smin={Dcompact , Topt, NT= 1, d= undefined }
6:Compute total runtime:
truntime =Tcount×max( Dcompact .tconsume , Topt.tproduce )
7:Step 3: Determine Code Distance
8:ford=dmintodmaxdo
9: Compute logical error rate:
pL(p, d) = 0 .1(100 p)(d+1)/2
10: ifC·d·pL(10−4, d)< ϵthen
11: Setdopt←d
12: break
13: end if
14:end for
15:Step 4: Optimize Data Block and Distillation Block Count
16:optspace time = space time(S)
17:while Truedo
18: while rproduce < rconsume do
19: Ndistill←Ndistill + 1
20: end while
21: while S[D].tproduce > S[T].tconsume /S[nT]do
22: S[D] =D′, where D′is the next larger data block protocol
23: end while
24:end while
25:Return: Optimized configuration S
1
FIG. 11: Optimizer Pseudo Code
The minimal setup consists of a compact data block combined with a single distillation block determined in Step
1. The total runtime of this setup is given by the number of Tgates multiplied by the clock cycle required to execute
eachT gate. The latter is determined by the slower operation between magic state production and consumption.
F or example, referring to III, the compact data block consumes a magic state every 9 clock cycles, while the 15-to-1
distillation block occupies 11 tiles and outputs a magic state every 11 clock cycles. Since the slower operation dictates
the runtime, the effective clock cycle for T gate execution is 11 cycles. If the total T gate count is 108, then the
algorithm completes in 11×108time steps.
c. Step 3: Determine the code distance
A higher code distance reduces the logical qubit error rate but requires more physical qubits. Denoting the code
distance by d, the number of physical qubits per patch is d2. The logical error rate per logical qubit per code cycle
can be approximated as [12]:

--- PDF page 23 ---
23
10 20 30 40 50 60
logN050000100000150000200000250000Optimal Time (s)10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
Optimal Time
Physical Qubit Count
nd = distillation block count
Compact data block
Intermediate data block
Fast data block4250045000475005000052500550005750060000
Optimal Physical Qubit Count
FIG. 12: Optimizer Result. This figure shows the optimization results for different protocols, where we used the
same setting as 1 except that the physical qubits is restricted to 60000. The red and blue lines represent the optimal
time and physical qubit count, respectively . The black dashed lines indicate changes in the distillation block count.
The colored background represents different data block protocols.
pL(p,d) = 0.1(100p)(d+1)/2. (C1)
The code distance must be suﬀiciently large to suppress the logical error rate such that the total logical error
probability for the entire algorithm remains below 1
164×11×108×d×pL(10−4,d)<0.01. (C2)
d. Step 4: Optimize the data block protocol and distil lation block count
Starting from the minimal setup, we identify the performance bottleneck, which typically lies in the speed of magic
state production. T o accelerate T gate execution, we increase the number of distillation blocks until the magic state
production rate surpasses the consumption rate. At this point, we switch to a larger data block protocol to further
enhance magic state consumption.
In principle, repeating this process eventually yields a time-optimal surface code scheme, though not necessarily
a space-time optimal one. However, for our limited set of distillation and data block protocols, we observe that the
time-optimal scheme coincides with the space-time optimal scheme. This suggests that, in the absence of physical
qubit constraints, the optimal surface code scheme always employs a ”fast block” configuration, with a number of
distillation blocks precisely matching the magic state consumption rate.
Thus, in the setting of infinite physicla qubits, what our optimizer does is simply decide the distillation protocol,
and code distance, then the data protocol must be fast block, and the number of distillation block must be the smallest
number such that the speed of magic state production matches the magic state consumption speed of fast block.
However, more intriguing patterns emerge when the number of physical qubits is constrained. The optimized surface
code scheme, as shown in Figure 12, illustrates how the optimal strategy evolves with increasing matrix size. When
the matrix size is small, the surface code prioritizes a time-optimal scheme. As the matrix size grows (the sparsity also
grows with logN), the scheme gradually reduces the distillation block count, reaching a minimum of three distillation
blocks. Beyond this point, further increases in matrix size lead to a transition in data block types, shifting from a
standard block to an intermediate block, and eventually to a compact block. Notably , as the data block type changes,
the runtime increases significantly .

--- PDF page 24 ---
24
CGNE Algorithm
Algorithm 1 CGNE
Require: A∈Rn×m, b∈Rm, x0
1:k←0
2:r0←b−Ax0,z0←ATr0,p0←z0
3:while ∥rk∥> ϵdo
4: wk←Apk
5: αk←∥zk∥2
∥wk∥2
6: xk+1←xk+αkpk
7: rk+1←rk−αkwk
8: zk+1←ATrk+1
9: βk←∥zk+1∥2
∥zk∥2
10: pk+1←zk+1+βkpk
11: k←k+ 1
12:end while
Ensure: xk
1
FIG. 13: CGNE Algorithm
Appendix D: The classical counterparts
1. Conjugate Gradient Method
In this section we introduce the runtime resource estimation of the Conjugate Gradient method.
Definition 1 (LSP) .The Linear System Problem: Find a vector x∈Rnsuch that it satisfies equation Ax=bwith
coeﬀicient matrix A∈Rm×nand right-hand side (RHS) vector b∈Rn.
A basic approach for solving an LSP is Gaussian elimination, or LU factorization, with O(N3)arithmetic operations.
IfA is a square symmetric positive semi definite (PSD) matrix, we can also apply Cholesky factorization with
O(N3)arithmetic operations. The best complexity for an iterative algorithm with respect to N isO(Ns√κlog(1/ϵ))
arithmetic operations for the Conjugate Gradient (CG) method solving systems with symmetric PSD matrices, where
sis the maximum number of non-zero elements in any row or column of A,κis the condition number of A, andϵis
the error allowed. If matrix A is just symmetric, one can use the Lanczos algorithm with higher complexity . F or an
LSP with a general square matrix A, the best iterative method is the GMRES algorithm, which has O(n3)worst-case
complexity [44]. F or problems in the form of ETEx=ETψ, known as normal equations, one can use a version of CG
methods with complexity O(ndκElog(1/ϵ)), whereκEis the condition number of matrix E [44]. F or a linear system
in general form with a non-PSD non-symmetric matrix, one can use the reformulation ATAx=ATband use a CG
method to solve it. Although CG methods for this reformulation have better worst-case complexity than GMRES
for the original system, practically GMRES has better performance, especially for large sparse systems with a large
condition number [44].
Here, we want to use CGNE (Algorithm 8.5 of [44]) as indicated in Algorithm 13.
As we can see, there is no matrix-matrix product in the CG algorithm. At each iteration, we need to perform two
mat-vec products. F or each sparse mat-vec product, we require 2Ns FLOPs. Additionally , we need three times vector
summation with 2N FLOPs. Also, 8N FLOPs needed for calculating αandβ. T otal FLOPs needed in each iteration
is4Ns+ 6N+ 8N. Thus the dominant cost is for mat-vec products.
Theorem 4. Starting from x0= 0 , Algorithm 13 reaches to∥xk−x∥
∥x∥≤ϵafterk≥1
2κlog 2
ϵ
.
Proof can be found in [45].
F or as-sparse Hermitian matrix, the total number of the FLOPs are
(1
2κlog2
ϵ
)×(4Ns+ 6N+ 8N) (D1)

--- PDF page 25 ---
25
2. Cholesky Decomposition Method
Cholesky decomposition, combined with subsequent Gaussian elimination, can be eﬀiciently parallelized with min-
imal overhead, particularly for large matrices. This allows us to maintain intermediate matrices in a sparse form,
enabling storage within GPU memory .
The algorithm based on Cholesky decomposition consists of the following steps:
1. Given a permutation of rows and columns of the linear equation matrix P and vector b, optimize the process
for solving Px=b.
2. Construct the necessary data structures to compute and store P.
3. Perform Cholesky decomposition: P=LL⊤, whereLis a sparse lower triangular matrix.
4. Solve the triangular systems: first, solve Ly=bfory, then solve L⊤x=yforx.
F or comparison with quantum algorithm performance evaluations, we exclude GPU data loading and unloading
time from our analysis.
Additionally , we conclude that each step of the algorithm is fully parallelizable, with the exception of synchronization
overhead, which remains negligible.
W e calculate the number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) for each step, where:
•N represents the size of matrix P and vector b.
•sis the maximum number of non-zero elements per row (or column), assuming the matrix is symmetric.
Step 1: Permutation of Rows and Columns
Exploiting matrix symmetry , we traverse each row and swap matrix elements as necessary , leading to:
FLOPs =N·s·(s+ 1) (D2)
Step 2: Data Structure Construction
Assuming the matrix is already stored in an optimal format, the primary operation is generating the index structures,
which takes:
FLOPs =N·s (D3)
Step 3: Cholesky Decomposition
F or each row, we perform factorization computations, resulting in:
FLOPs =N·(1 +s+ 2s2) (D4)
Step 4: T riangular Solve
This involves solving two triangular systems, first for yand then for x:
FLOPs =N·(1 +s)·4 (D5)
T otal FLOPs
Summing all the FLOPs from the above steps:
T otal FLOPs =N·s·(s+ 1) +N·s+N·(1 +s+ 2s2) +N·(1 +s)·4 (D6)
=N·(3s2+ 7s+ 5) (D7)
Since the CD method is fully parallelizable, we can estimate the runtime by simply divide the FLOPS by the
supercomputer’s execution speed. According to [46], some of the state-of-the-art supercomputer parameters are
summerized in IV.
Using these parameters—assuming k= 10 ,s= logN,ϵ= 0.01, and a quantum computer clock cycle of 10 ns—
along with a fast block implementation where a logical T operation is executed per clock cycle, we can compute the
runtime of the CD method on a supercomputer and compare it with the Quantum Linear Systems Algorithm (QLSA).
The results of this comparison are presented in Figure 14.
Our analysis indicates that the CD method exhibits a time complexity of 3Ns2, which, in contrast to the CG
method (see 2), has a less favorable dependence on s. However, a key advantage of this algorithm is its high degree
of parallelizability , enabling eﬀicient execution on supercomputers. Leveraging this capability significantly enhances
its performance in terms of runtime. Consequently , the onset of potential quantum advantage may be delayed,
as illustrated in Figure 14, where it is projected to emerge at a problem size of 2100≈1030. Nevertheless, since
the runtime of QLSA doesn’t scaling much with matrix size, the runtime required to reach the potential quantum
advantage threshold remains approximately 200 hours.

--- PDF page 26 ---
26
Name FLOP/s
Aurora 1.012×1018
El Capitan FP64 2.726×1018
El Capitan FP32 5.453×1018
El Capitan FP16 4.361×1019
El Capitan FP8 8.721×1019
F rontier FP64/32 1.810×1018
T ABLE IV: Supercomputer FLOP/s Comparison
101102
Matrix size, 2^n1017
1012
107
102
103108101310181023HoursExecution time
Aurora
El Capitan FP64
El Capitan FP32
El Capitan FP16
El Capitan FP8
Frontier FP64/32
Quantum
FIG. 14: Runtime comparison of the CD method across different supercomputers.
Appendix E: Quantum energy analysis
The energy consumption of a quantum computer can be estimated as the product of three factors: the scale of the
quantum computer (i.e., the number of physical qubits), the energy eﬀiciency of the quantum computer (i.e., power
consumption per qubit), and the operating time. This relationship is expressed as:
E=nq×Pq×T, (E1)
where:
•E is the total energy consumption,
•nqis the number of physical qubits,
•Pqis the power consumption per physical qubit, and
•T is the total operating time.
The values of nqandT are determined from prior analysis, leaving Pqas the main parameter to be explained in
detail.
a. Power consumption per qubit
As derived in [15], the power consumption per physical qubit, Pq, can be expressed as:
Pq=q"
1 +ϕ 
1 +βn−1/3
p
ηcCOP (Tc)|c!
+1−ϕ
FOM (To)#
, (E2)
where:

--- PDF page 27 ---
27
•qis the computational power per physical qubit,
•ϕrepresents the fraction of power used for direct cooling,
•βis the external heat conduction ratio,
•npis the number of physical qubits per logical qubit,
•ηcis the eﬀiciency of the cooling system,
• COP (Tc)|cis the coeﬀicient of performance (COP) of the cooling system at the chip temperature Tc, and
• FOM (To)is the figure of merit for the secondary cooling system.
The second term in Eq. (E2) accounts for direct heat dissipation, while the third term represents secondary cooling
power. Given the early development stage of quantum computers, accurate hardware parameter values for future
large-scale fault-tolerant quantum computers remain uncertain, and parameter estimates can vary widely .
b. Simplified estimation of Pq
F or a rough estimation of Pqbased on current quantum computer parameters, we make the following assumptions:
• The direct heat dissipation power dominates over computational power and secondary cooling power, allowing
the omission of the first and third terms in Eq. (E2).
• The volume of the quantum computer is proportional to the number of physical qubits.
Under these assumptions, Pqsimplifies to:
Pq=˜q
ηcCOP (Tc)|c, (E3)
where ˜qis a parameter to be determined.
c. Determination of ˜q
Based on data from [16], IBM’s Quantum System T wo dilution refrigerator can house 4,158 qubits while consuming
26 k W of power. This yields a per-qubit power consumption of approximately 6.25 W:
Pq=26,000 W
4,158≈6.25 W. (E4)
F or superconducting qubits used by IBM, the coeﬀicient of performance (COP) of the cooling system is approxi-
mately 10−5. Substituting into Eq. (E3), we obtain:
˜q= 6.25×105. (E5)
d. Range of Pqfor different architectures
Assuming ˜qremains constant across different architectures, Pqdepends primarily on the COP . F or a COP ranging
from 10−5to10−2, the power consumption per qubit varies between 6.25 W and 0.0625 W.
1. Conclusion
This analysis provides an approximate estimation of the energy consumption for quantum computers, highlighting
the dependence of power consumption on cooling eﬀiciency and quantum computer architecture. F uture work will
refine these estimates as hardware parameters become more concrete.

--- PDF page 28 ---
28
Appendix F: Classical energy analysis
The estimation of classical energy consumption follows the formula:
Ec=tPc=op
fcPc=opPc
fc(F1)
whereEcrepresents the total energy consumption, tdenotes the runtime, op is the total number of clock cycles, fc
stands for the clock frequency , and Pcis the power consumption. Consequently , determining the energy eﬀiciency of
CPUs, expressed asPc
fc, is crucial for performance evaluation.
Most mainstream desktop CPUs exhibit power consumption ranging from 50 watts to 400 watts, with clock fre-
quencies spanning from 1 GHz to 5 GHz. Given that power and frequency are positively correlated [47], the power
eﬀiciency typically falls within the range of 50 watts per GHz to 80 watts per GHz. In this analysis, we assume a
representative value of 50 watts per GHz to estimate the CPU energy consumption of the algorithm.