
--- PDF page 1 ---
Referee Report - Towards identifying possible fault-tolerant
advantage of quantum linear system algorithms in terms of space,
time and energy
March 10, 2026
The authors provide a detailed resource estimation for the HHL quantum linear system algorithm
running on a fault-tolerant superconducting device, including energy cost estimates. Logical re-
sources (T-gate counts, qubit counts) are estimated via a Q# implementation, and Trotter and
QFT errors are bounded using exponential-type error bounds from Ref. [13]. These logical re-
sources are then mapped to physical resources using a surface code optimization framework, and
the authors compare the resulting quantum overhead against the classical conjugate gradient (CG)
method, reporting possible quantum advantages at matrix sizesN∼233to 248, requiringO(105)
physical qubits. Energy estimates are based on IBM Quantum System Two.
The central question in this work, namely the energy and quantum resource cost crossover point for
an important quantum algorithm, is an important and timely question for the community. Overall,
the authors provide a useful methodology for performing detailed complexity estimates across
time, space, and energy. The error analysis using exponential-type error bounds is interesting and
valuable to the community. However, in its current state, I do not believe the paper is suitable for
publication without major revisions or clarifications. Several assumptions underlying the crossover
claims with classical methods need to be clarified and discrepancies between the main text and
appendices need to be addressed for the results to be reliable.
Major Comments
1. The use of the original HHL algorithm as opposed to state-of-the-art (SOTA) QLSA reduces the
practical relevance of the results. The authors acknowledge that “polynomial scalings ons,κ,
1/εhas been updated for the convenience of exact pre-factor derivation” (p. 3), implying that
they intentionally use the original HHL framework withO(κ2s/ε2) scaling rather than modern
QLSA variants (Refs. [33–37]) that achieve dramatically improved dependence on the condition
number (e.g., linear inκ). However, since the central result of the work is a crossover analysis
between quantum and classical methods, using an outdated algorithm reduces the relevance of
the claimed advantage boundaries. At a minimum, the authors should discuss/estimate the shift
in the crossover points with SOTA algorithms.
2. The authors exclude data loading and readout costs from the resource estimates. However,
efficient data loading remains a major challenge for general classes of matrices, and hence the
claimed advantage boundary could shift significantly when these costs are included. The cap-
tion for Figure 1 should caution the readers regarding this assumption. Additionally, it would
1

--- PDF page 2 ---
strengthen the paper to provide even rough estimates of how the crossover points would shit
under realistic data loading models.
3. The comparison with classical baselines is not completely clear. The main text refers to the
conjugate gradient (CG) method as the equivalent classical baseline, which requires symmetric
positive definite (SPD) systems, as noted in Appendix D. However, the analysis in Appendix D
is based on CGNE. These are different algorithms, as CGNE squares the condition number and
requires more flops per iteration. It appears that this square factor was included in Thm. 4,
but this is not readily apparent from the text. Moreover, the analysis seems to mix different
classes of matrices – some positive semi-definite, some symmetric. The authors should clarify
whether or not they are assuming the input matrix is Hermitian during the classical baseline.
If so, along with the assumption on the eigenvalues of A, CG is a reasonable comparison, but
in the appendix the authors compare with CGNE. Regardless, one should ensure a comparison
against state-of-the-art classical methods including preconditioned, sparse solvers, rather than
costly normal equation-based methods. All in all, the comparison with classical methods is not
clear and does not seem to be properly handled between the body and the appendices.
4. The classical CG runtime is estimated on a single desktop CPU at 1 GHz / 50 W, while the
quantum side uses an optimized fault-tolerant architecture withO(105) physical qubits. This is
not an apples-to-apples comparison. Appendix D compares against Cholesky decomposition on
supercomputers, pushing the crossover to∼2100, yet this result appears only in the appendix.
The Cholesky/supercomputer comparison should be featured in the main text and the main
text should clearly state that the advantage boundaries would depend on the classical hardware
used. Moreover, the classical hardware assumed for comparison is likely not representative of the
hardware that would likely be used for these classes of problems. The energy cost for quantum
hardware is estimated using numbers found in Ref. 18, but these numbers are based oncurrent
estimates and are, in the words of the authors of Ref. 18, “extremelyrough”. These numbers
also ignore economies of scale that are likely afforded by larger system sizes.
5. The probabilistic bound (Eq. B19) used to prove Statement 1 is derived from numerical exper-
iments on “small matrix size” (pg. 17), with the claim that “the error does not depend onn.”
This claim is crucial for the entire scaling analysis, yet: (a) Figure 9 lacks axis labels and a
description of the experimental setup; (b) the matrix sizes, distributions, and number of sam-
ples are not reported; (c) no rigorous justification is given for why small-matrix behavior should
extrapolate to larger matrices. This needs to be explained clearly.
6. Figure 1 assumesκ=s= log(N). (1) This is an optimistic assumption onκthat may only
be valid in limited settings. Many real-world linear systems have condition numbers that grow
polynomially withN. Since the quantum cost scales asκ2and CG scales linearly inκ, the
crossover point is very sensitive to this assumption. The authors should validate this assumption
using examples of matrix classes where this holds true. It would also strengthen the paper to
present crossover estimates under more realistic assumptions (e.g.,κ=Nα). (2) The assumption
ons= log(N) is quite interesting. The sparsity is usually a fixed property of the matrix structure
and not a function of its size. The authors should again validate this assumption using examples
of real matrix classes.
Minor Comments
1. Many of the relevant symbols are either ill defined, overloaded, or not defined. For example,
Trepresents at least four distinct quantities throughout: the number ofT-gates, the SWAP
2

--- PDF page 3 ---
operator, the number of repeated unitaries, and the total operating time.
2. In pg. 17, Fig. 19, the axes are unlabeled and the caption does not describe the experimental
setup (matrix types, sizes, number of samples).
3. Multiple grammatical and spelling errors are found throughout the paper. A few examples:
“primarly” (p. 3), “physicla” (p. 5, p. 22), “Toffli” (throughout; should be “Toffoli”), “tyler ex-
pansion” (p. 15; should be “Taylor”), “dividingng” (Appendix D), “changable” (p. 3), “Tranvis”
(p. 6). Please check for typos and grammatical errors.
4. The limitations and assumptions used in the work such as exclusion of data loading and oracle
costs, use of original HHL, and classical baseline on 1 CPU, should be restated in the Conclusions.
3