
--- PDF page 1 ---
T owards identifying possible fault-tolerant advantage of quantum linear system
algorithms in terms of space, time and energy
Y ue T u,1, 2Mark Dubynskyi,3, 4Mohammad Mohammadisiahroudi,5Katia
Riashchentceva,4Jinglei Cheng,1Dmitry Ryashchentse,6T amás T erlaky ,5and Junyu Liu1
1Department of Computer Science, The University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, P A 15260, USA
2Department of Computational and Applied Mathematics,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
3Mason Experimental Geometry Lab, F airfax, V A 22030, USA
4The University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA
5Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, P A 18015, USA
6Charles Schwab Corporation, W estlake, TX 76262, USA
(Dated: F ebruary 15, 2025)
Quantum computing, a prominent non-V on Neu-
mann paradigm beyond Moore’s law, offers su-
perpolynomial speedups over classical methods
for specific problems. However, its practical ad-
vantages in terms of space, time, and energy ef-
ficiency remain unclear. F urthermore, its appli-
cability to critical real-world problems in science
and industry , such as machine learning, is still un-
certain. Finally , quantum noise in current devices
entails significant overheads for error correction
and fault tolerance, complicating fair comparisons
with their classical counterparts. In this paper,
we address all three issues through a detailed re-
source estimation of space, time, and energy for
fault-tolerant superconducting quantum devices.
W e focus on the Harrow–Hassidim–Lloyd (HHL)
algorithm, a quantum linear system algorithm
with practical applications in machine learning.
F or the pure computing process of these algo-
rithms (excluding memory and data transfer) and
compared to the exact classical counterpart (the
conjugate gradient method), we find that pos-
sible quantum advantages could emerge around
the matrix size N≈233∼248, requiring O(105)
physical qubits, O(1012∼1013)Joules of energy ,
and approximately 10 days of computational time
(O(106)seconds) under precise settings of sur-
face code fault-tolerant computation and magic
state distillation, with condition number, spar-
sity , and precision κ,s≈ O(10∼100),ϵ∼0.01. Key
parameters for the algorithm, including N,κ,s,ϵ ,
are all adjustable in our resource estimator. A
precise map of the quantum-classical comparison
for these parameters is provided, illustrating the
boundary of a practical, potential quantum ad-
vantage. Our work demonstrates that significant
benefits from quantum computing in important
real-world problems, such as quantum linear sys-
tem algorithms, are achievable and quantitatively
determines how advanced a fault-tolerant quan-
tum computer must be to realize this goal.I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing [1] stands as the leading
paradigm of next-generation computing technology . Un-
like traditional computing, quantum computers can ac-
cess and manipulate quantum states, which serve as car-
riers of information for computational purposes. One of
the primary motivations for developing quantum com-
puting is its potential to achieve a possible quantum ad-
vantage over its classical counterparts in solving certain
problems. This potential quantum advantage, studied
primarily in terms of time cost within computational
complexity theory , has been theoretically demonstrated
in problems such as factoring [2], searching [3], and simu-
lation [4]. These advancements offer hope for sustaining
or surpassing Moore’s law in the semiconductor industry .
However, beyond the time complexity estimated in the
gate models from theoretical computer science, it is chal-
lenging to estimate and justify the possible quantum ad-
vantage in practice. First, practical cost estimation of
quantum computing requires state-of-the-art knowledge,
from detailed theory covering prefactors in front of the
big-O notation of complexity [5, 6], to explicit designs
of quantum hardware, and it includes more comprehen-
sive measurement such as time costs (measured in sec-
onds), space costs (number of physical qubits), and in
particular energy costs. Especially , the complex nature
of quantitative energy sustainability estimation is highly
uninvestigated, although the possible energy advantage
of quantum computing algorithm is discussed mostly in
the qualitative argument [7, 8]. Second, although the
existence of potential quantum advantage for some algo-
rithms is solidly justified in theory , it is challenging to
prove that those algorithms can turn into real-world, sig-
nificant benefits especially for commercial applications
[9]. Finally , quantum states are extremely fragile and
current quantum processors are noisy , making quantum
error correction the only possible way to make large-scale,
fault-tolerant quantum computing. F ault-tolerance, al-
though sustainable in theory , requires lots of additional
resources and experimental challenges, making precise re-
source estimation much more challenging.
In this work, we address all three of these challenges

--- PDF page 2 ---
2
by conducting a full-stack, energy-aware resource esti-
mation for the so-called Harrow–Hassidim–Lloyd (HHL)
algorithm [10]. The HHL algorithm provides a Quantum
Linear System Algorithm (QLSA) that can be used for
matrix inversion. Given a linear equation A|x⟩=|b⟩,
the algorithm returns a quantum state |x⟩=A−1|b⟩as a
solution. F or certain classes of matrices, it has been theo-
retically shown that the algorithm runs in logN time for
anN×N matrix, making it exponentially faster than any
known classical counterpart. Since linear algebra appli-
cations are ubiquitous in modern science and technology ,
the algorithm is regarded as one of the most promising
applications for large-scale, fault-tolerant quantum pro-
cessors [11].
T o identify the regime of possible, practical quantum
advantages, we systematically investigate the costs of
QLSA. The primary input of QLSA is a general Hermi-
tian matrix A of dimension N= 2n, with row sparsity s
(wheres= max j(# of nonzero entries in row jofA)),
precisionϵ, and condition number κ. F or non-Hermitian
matrices, one can effectively solve a corresponding Her-
mitian matrix instead, requiring only one additional
qubit [10, 11]. At the logical level, we primarily adopt the
original and classical HHL framework [10, 11]. F or quan-
tum simulation, we employ the one-sparse Hamiltonian
simulation model to implement eiAt, using [12] to esti-
mate the T rotter error. Finally , we provide an explicit
formula for estimating resource requirements at the log-
ical level for HHL, particularly focusing on the number
of different types of quantum gates. These estimates are
validated using a quantum circuit state-vector simulation
code.
Moreover, we extend our analysis to resource estima-
tions at the fault-tolerant level. T o achieve this, we utilize
the framework proposed by Litinski [13] to estimate the
fault-tolerance resource. The framework assume clifford
gates are cheap and only accepts the number of T-gates
as input, then search for the optimal surface code scheme
that will minimize the space-time cost with logical error
rate below one percent. . Finally , we compare our fault-
tolerant resource estimates with those of classical algo-
rithms. In particular, we discuss the classical counterpart
to the Quantum Linear System Algorithm (QLSA): the
conjugate gradient (CG) method [14]. The CG method
is widely regarded as the classical analogue of QLSA,
as it similarly exploits the sparsity and well-conditioned
nature of the problem. Its time complexity is given by
O(Nsκ log(1/ϵ)). W e conduct a detailed analysis of its
exact scaling behavior and provide an estimation of its
clock cycle requirements.
The primary energy costs associated with executing
the HHL algorithm stem from the cooling system. On
the quantum side, we estimate the energy consumption
based on the model proposed in [15], assuming that the
energy cost scales linearly with the number of qubits, the
total energy cost is given by the product of the runtime,
the number of physical qubits, and a cooling eﬀiciency
factor.T o estimate the cooling eﬀiciency , we refer to [16],
which provides an approximation based on IBM Quan-
tum System T wo’s dilution refrigerator, with an esti-
mated energy eﬀiciency of 6.25 W atts per qubit. How-
ever, it is important to note that cooling eﬀiciency is
highly dependent on the quantum computer’s architec-
ture and may vary significantly as quantum hardware
evolves. Consequently , this estimation should be viewed
as a rough approximation rather than a precise metric.
On the classical side, we estimate the energy consump-
tion using the power requirements of a typical desktop
CPU. A standard desktop processor operating at a clock
frequency of 1 GHz consumes approximately 50 W atts.
This provides a baseline for evaluating the comparative
energy eﬀiciency of classical and quantum computations
in the context of the QLSA algorithm.
Note that we consider only the costs incurred dur-
ing the computation process. The costs associated with
the interface between classical and quantum processors—
such as uploading the matrix A and the vector |b⟩to
the quantum device, as well as downloading the state
|x⟩to classical memory—are not addressed in this work.
The uploading problem can be mitigated by fast quan-
tum memory solutions, such as Quantum Random Ac-
cess Memory (QRAM) [17], whose circuits are, in fact,
classically simulatable [18]. Meanwhile, the downloading
process depends on the specific needs of the user. Since
classical users cannot handle exponentially large datasets
[19], quantum tomography techniques [20, 21] can be em-
ployed to extract partial information from |x⟩.
Our work is organized as follows. In Section II, we
discuss our results comparing quantum and classical ap-
proaches, along with their implications for computational
speed and energy eﬀiciency . In Section III, we outline
the key methodologies employed to obtain these results.
At the logical level, this includes circuit implementation
and exact scaling derivation, while at the physical level,
it encompasses the implementation of the surface code
optimizer . In Section IV, we provide conclusions and an
outlook on future research directions. Additional techni-
cal details, including a detailed formulation of the HHL
algorithm, T rotter simulation strategies, surface code se-
tups, classical counterparts, and energy analysis, are pro-
vided in the Supplementary Material.
II. RESUL TS
In this chapter, we present the main conclusions of
our study , structured in two parts. The first part ex-
amines the operation count overhead associated with the
algorithm’s execution, independent of hardware param-
eters. F or the quantum component, this is quantified
by the logical T-gate count—the bottleneck logical re-
source in surface code-based quantum computing—while
the classical component is evaluated based on the number
of floating-point operations (FLOPs).

--- PDF page 3 ---
3
Proposition 1. Consider a system of linear equations
Ax=b, whereAhas been scaled such that its eigenvalues
lie in the interval [1
κ,1]. Denote by |b⟩the normalized
quantum state proportional to b. Assume access to an
oracle that provides access to the elements of a sparse
submatrix of A. Then, there exists a quantum algorithm
that takes the input state |b⟩and outputs the normalized
solution state |˜x⟩with additive error ||˜x−x||less thanϵ.
The algorithm requires T T -gates and Q queries to the
oracle, where:
T=q
320
3πκ2s
ϵ2×(18 logN+ 90r+ 15), (1)
Q=q
320
3πκ2s
ϵ2×2, (2)
whereN is the matrix size, κis the condition number, s
is the sparsity of A, andϵis the error.
W e refer the reader to appendix A for a detailed
derivation of 1. Here, we emphasize that 1 exhibit
different scaling compared to the results presented in
the original paper, where the complexity was given by
O 
log(N)·s2κ2/ϵ
.In our work, we have increased the
dependence on ϵto order 2 while reducing the depen-
dence onsto order 1.
The dependence on ϵis because we comprehensively
analised the error introduced by trotterization and QFT,
while the original paper’s error estimation only account
for the latter. F or detailed derivation we refer readers to
B.
The reduction in s-dependence is achieved by assum-
ing that the matrix is perfectly decomposed into exactly
ssub matrices at the oracle level. Although this as-
sumption does not hold for general sparse matrices, many
QLSA applications involve fixed matrix structures, which
allow for eﬀicient oracle implementation that satisfies this
assumption, for example, in [22] and [23]. If we remove
this assumption, we’ll have to additionally implement
the decomposition procedure, one approach is to utilize
graph coloring algorithm, which decompose the matrix
into 6s2one sparse matrices, thus increase a prefactor of
6and square the dependence on sparsity . F urthermore,
the graph coloring procedure is being called in each HS1,
and according to our implementation, the graph coloring
procedure involve around 200×logN T -gates, this cost is
about 10 times the other cost in HS1 ( 18 logN+90r+15 ),
thus introducing another prefactor of 10, so overall, the
cost for graph coloring based general QLSA will have a
scaling of 60sT .
Proposition 2. F or the CG method solving the linear
systemAx=b, the algorithm runs in C FLOPs, where:
C= (4Ns+ 14N)×1
2κlog2
ϵ
(3)
N is the matrix size, kis the condition number, sis the
sparsity, and ϵis the error threshold.The detailed derivation of 2 we refer readers to ap-
pendix 4
Next, we incorporate hardware parameters to illustrate
the specific runtime overhead and its relationship with
various input parameters. The assumed hardware pa-
rameters are as follows: the quantum computer has an
infinite number of physical qubits, a physical qubit er-
ror rate of 10−5, a logical cycle execution time of 10 ns,
and an energy consumption of 6.25 watts per physical
qubit. W e present heatmaps 1 and 1, which illustrate
the runtime and energy cost ratio between classical and
quantum algorithms. In these heatmaps, blue regions
indicate a ratio less than 1, implying that the quantum
algorithm incurs lower overhead than its classical coun-
terpart. Consequently , these regions can be interpreted
as exhibiting possible quantum advantage. Also, we pro-
vide line charts 1, 1, and 1 to depict how runtime, space,
and energy costs vary with matrix size, where we assume
conditional number to be fixed to 10, the sparsity to be
logN. Of course, this assumption may not perfectly align
with future quantum computers. F or readers interested
in different configurations, the runtime estimation and
energy consumption can be easily rescaled based on the
ratio of the new parameters for clock cycle time and en-
ergy consumption per qubit.
III. METHODS
A. Quantum part
In this work, we present the first end-to-end analysis
of the QLSA, covering the resource cost from logical level
to runtime-level. The overall workflow of this study is il-
lustrated in Fig. 1 and is broadly divided into two stages:
logical resource analysis and physical resource analysis.
At the logical level, we first implemented the quan-
tum circuit for the Quantum Linear Systems Algorithm
(QLSA) using Q#, a programming language designed for
circuit-based quantum computing. This implementation
allowed us to estimate the logical qubit and T-gate re-
quirements for each submodule. Among all submodules
in the QLSA algorithm, the primary bottleneck lies in one
specific subroutine—the one-sparse Hamiltonian simula-
tion (HS1). This subroutine is responsible for construct-
ing a unitary operation that implements eiAt, whereA
is the input matrix. The high resource demand of HS1
stems from the T rotterization process, which requires ap-
plying HS1 repeatedly to suppress the error to a desired
level. Additionally , the unitary operation itself must be
executed multiple times as part of the Quantum Phase
Estimation (QPE) procedure, further increasing the to-
tal number of HS1 invocations. T o precisely determine
the scaling behavior of HS1, it is essential to analyze
the algorithm’s error. There are two primary sources of
error in the QLSA algorithm: (1) errors introduced by
T rotterization and (2) errors from the Quantum F ourier
T ransform (QFT). While previous analyses of QLSA have

--- PDF page 5 ---
5
Based on our error estimation, we determined the re-
quired number of HS1 repetitions for specific input cases.
The gate count per HS1 operation was obtained from our
earlier code implementation. Since T-gates represent the
primary resource bottleneck in our analysis, we focus on
tracking only the T-gate count. The total number of T-
gates required is given by the product of the total number
of HS1 invocations and the T-gate count per HS1 opera-
tion, which give us result as shown in 1.
After determining the number of logical qubits and
logicalT-gates required by the algorithm, the next step
is to translate these logical resources into the fault-
tolerant physical resource under a quantum error cor-
rection (QEC) scheme. Among the various existing QEC
schemes, we adopt the surface code in this study as it has
the highest fault tolerant error threshold, and has been
demonstrated by recent experiments [24].
In essence, when executing quantum algorithms using
the surface code model, physical qubits are categorized
into data blocks and distillation blocks. Data blocks are
responsible for storing logical qubits and consuming the
so-called ”magic states,” while distillation blocks gener-
ate these magic states. Each time a data block con-
sumes a magic state produced by a distillation block,
aT-gate operation is executed. Consequently , the to-
tal physical qubit count is simply the sum of physical
qubits in the data and distillation blocks. The runtime of
surface code-based quantum computing is approximately
given by the number of T-gates divided by their execution
speed, which is determined by the specific configuration
of data and distillation blocks as well as the hardware
parameters of the quantum computer.
T o determine the physical qubit count and runtime, it
is essential to establish an optimal configuration of data
and distillation blocks. Our goal is to find a configura-
tion that minimizes the space-time volume, defined as
the product of the number of physical qubits and the
runtime. Achieving this requires considering several con-
straints and trade-offs, which are listed as follows:
• The distillation block must be large enough to
achieve the desired T-state error rate.
• The code distance of the surface code must be large
enough to achieve the desired logical error rate.
• The data block’s eﬀiciency to consume magic states
comes at a price of using more physicla qubits.
• The distillation block’s eﬀiciency to produce magic
states comes at a price of using more physical
qubits.
W e use the procedure proposed in [13] to optimize
space-time volume under such considerations. The pro-
cedure includes 4 steps:
1. Determine the distillation protocol. W e select
the most cost-effective distillation protocol that
achieves the required T-state error rate.2. Construct a minimal setup. W e design the space-
optimal protocol.
3. Determine the code distance. W e identify the min-
imum code distance that ensures the error rate re-
mains below the threshold.
4. Add distillation blocks. Building on the space-
optimal protocol, we incrementally adopt data
block and distillation block protocols with larger
space overhead but reduced time overhead until the
optimal space-time cost is achieved.
W e implemented these four steps in a script, which will
be further discussed in Appendix . By inputting the al-
gorithm’s logical T-gate count, logical qubits count, and
reasonably assumed quantum computer parameters (in-
cluding quantum gate fidelity , the number of physical
qubits, and clock frequency), the script identifies the con-
figuration of distillation and data blocks that minimizes
space-time volume. It then outputs the corresponding
runtime and physical qubits overhead.
So now we are only left with energy estimation. W e
use the model proposed in [15], where the primary energy
cost of quantum computers is cooling, and the energy
consumption grows with number of qubits because they
assume that a single refrigeration unit can accommodate
a limited number of qubits for super-conducting qubits.
As a result, the quantum computer’s power consumption
is proportional to the number of physical qubits. Now
we define the energy eﬀiciency as the power consump-
tion per qubit, we use the data provided by [16], where
they targeted at IBM Quantum System T wo’s dilution
refrigerator, the system houses 4158 physical qubits and
operates at a power of 27 KW, thus, in interms of single
qubit, the power eﬀiciency is 6.25 W atts.
These results provide an intuitive and detailed refer-
ence for end-to-end runtime estimation of the resources
required to run the QLSA algorithm and serve as a practi-
cal basis for developing QLSA-related applications. How-
ever, we emphasize that current quantum computers are
far from being capable of running the HHL algorithm,
and future quantum hardware may differ significantly
from existing systems. Also, there has been significant
progress in the QLSA algorithm, such that the algorithm
we are esitmating may not be the optimal. Therefore,
the specific results we provide should be viewed as rough
baseline predictions based on the current state of quan-
tum computing technology .
B. Classical part
In this work, we address two classical linear system
solver: the conjugate gradient (CG) method and the
Cholesky decomposition (CD) method. W e mainly fo-
cus on former as CG is generally considere as the classi-
cal cournterparat of QLSA due to its iterative nature and
ability to handle sparse and well-conditioned systems. on

--- PDF page 6 ---
6
the other hand, the CD method is not a direct correspon-
dence to QLSA as it is deterministic with no dependence
onϵ, however CD is more often used in supercomputers
and we include it in D.
F or detailed derivation of the resource cost for boths
methods we refer readers to appendix D.
IV. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this work, we perform an end-to-end resource esti-
mation of the HHL algorithm in terms of time, space, and
energy . Unlike existing resource estimations, including
[5], our work provides a detailed analysis of fault toler-
ance based on surface codes. Moreover, we precisely ad-
dress energy sustainability by employing physical models
of superconducting quantum devices. Our findings con-
firm that quantum computing will indeed have an energy
advantage at a large scale based on current supercon-
ducting quantum technologies, resolving a long-standing
concern about the energy sustainability of quantum com-
puting in practical applications [7, 8]. Other innovative
aspects of our work include a detailed comparison be-
tween quantum and classical approaches to solving linear
systems and matrix inversion, an analysis of theoretical
upper bounds versus practical average cases, and a quan-
tum circuit simulator for end-to-end HHL algorithms, the
details of which are summarized in the Supplementary
Materials.
Although we confirm that potential quantum advan-
tages might appear at the scale of 235∼250matrix sizes
and105physical qubits, the practical costs could be lower
due to the overestimation of resource counts in the T rot-
ter simulation. Moreover, smarter designs for quantum
error correction and energy-sustainable innovations in
quantum hardware might further enhance performance.On the other hand, compared to other resource estima-
tions of quantum algorithms in different domains (such as
cryptography used for digital signatures and blockchains
[25]), the HHL algorithm appears to achieve potential
quantum advantages with a smaller number of physical
qubits [25]. However, better designs, including quantum
memories, might further improve the capabilities of cryp-
tographically relevant quantum computers [26].
Our work presents significant opportunities for bring-
ing quantum computing into practice. F or example, we
do not address the uploading and downloading challenges
of the HHL algorithm, which may be critical for data-
intensive applications. Active developments are under-
way on both the hardware side [27] and the system de-
sign side [28, 29] toward large-scale and error-resilient
QRAMs [18] in promising hardware platforms such as
circuit/cavity QED/QAD [27]. Notably , since QRAM
circuits are classically simulatable, precise estimates of
QRAM costs can be investigated on a large scale [18].
Moreover, for the downloading process, a detailed classi-
fication of quantum computing user needs may be essen-
tial. If quantum customers are classical, what will classi-
cal customers require? The first few elements of the state
|x⟩? Some expectation value of operators [20]? Other im-
portant directions include further exploration of energy
sustainability . Can we provide energy estimations for
other hardware, such as neutral-atom quantum comput-
ers? Can we make device-independent statements about
energy advantages? Can we generalize such estimations
to a broader range of quantum algorithms? Finally , it
would also be interesting to investigate more advanced
versions of quantum algorithms [30–34] and classical al-
gorithms [14], as well as improved designs for quantum
error correction codes [35–37] and quantum memories
[26].
[1] Michael A Nielsen and Isaac L Chuang. Quantum compu-
tation and quantum information . Cambridge university
press, 2010.
[2] Peter W Shor. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime fac-
torization and discrete logarithms on a quantum com-
puter. SIAM review , 41(2):303–332, 1999.
[3] Lov K Grover. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm
for database search. In Proceedings of the twenty-eighth
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , pages
212–219, 1996.
[4] Seth Lloyd. Universal quantum simulators. Science ,
273(5278):1073–1078, 1996.
[5] David Jennings, Matteo Lostaglio, Sam Pallister, An-
drew T Sornborger, and Yiğit Subaşı. Eﬀicient quantum
linear solver algorithm with detailed running costs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.11352 , 2023.
[6] Alexander M Dalzell, B David Clader, Grant Salton,
Mario Berta, Cedric Y en-Y u Lin, David A Bader, Niki-
tas Stamatopoulos, Martin JA Schuetz, F ernando GSL
Brandão, Helmut G Katzgraber, et al. End-to-end re-source analysis for quantum interior-point methods and
portfolio optimization. PRX Quantum , 4(4):040325,
2023.
[7] Alexia Auffèves. Quantum technologies need a quantum
energy initiative. PRX Quantum , 3(2):020101, 2022.
[8] T ravis L Scholten, Carl J Williams, Dustin Moody ,
Michele Mosca, William Hurley , William J Zeng,
Matthias T royer, Jay M Gambetta, et al. Assessing the
benefits and risks of quantum computers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.16317 , 2024.
[9] John Preskill. Beyond NISQ: The Megaquop Machine ,
Q2B 2024.
[10] Aram W Harrow, A vinatan Hassidim, and Seth Lloyd.
Quantum algorithm for linear systems of equations.
Physical review letters , 103(15):150502, 2009.
[11] Danial Dervovic, Mark Herbster, Peter Mountney , Si-
mone Severini, Naïri Usher, and Leonard W ossnig. Quan-
tum linear systems algorithms: a primer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.08227 , 2018.
[12] Andrew M Childs, Y uan Su, Minh C T ran, Nathan

--- PDF page 17 ---
17
Now with E(t)in hand, we can bound (B4) using triangle inequalities:
∥H′−H∥=1
tZt
0dτE(τ)
≤1
tZt
0dτ∥E(τ)∥
=1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1(j−k−1Y
l=1eiHlt1)Zt1
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ(1Y
l=j−k−1e−iHjt1)
≤1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1(j−k−1Y
l=1eiHlt1)Zt1
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ(1Y
l=j−k−1e−iHjt1)
=1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1Zt1
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ
≤1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1Zt1
0dτeiHj−kτ[Hj,Hj−k]e−iHj−kτ
=1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1Zt1
0dτ∥[Hj,Hj−k]∥
≤1
tZt
0dt1nX
j=1j−1X
k=1Zt1
0dτ2max m∥Hm∥2
=1
tn(n−1)
2t2
22max m∥Hm∥2
=n(n−1)t
2max m∥Hm∥2
(B18)
This bound is tight, as we can take example of n= 2,t= 0.2,H1 = [[1,0],[0,−1]] , andH2 = [[0,1],[1,0]] , the
bound and the actual error gives the same value 0.1. However, this bound is significantly above average, the intuition
behind this is that in (B13), the error term is a sum of all the commutators, and the commutators can cancel each
other, but the bound adds up the norm of all the commutators.
Intuitively this is similar to bounding the sum of random numbers, the bound is the number of random numbers
times the maximum of the random numbers.
So the better strategy here is to use probabilistic bound instead, where we tries to bound the error with failure rate
below certain threshold.
F rom the numerical result, we can see that the error does not depend on n. Thus, we can simply do the numerical
experiment on small matrix size, and take the upper bound around the edge of distribution, we have:
ϵ=∥t
r∥ (B19)
Where t is the time step and r is the trotter repetition. Now we have the probabilistic bound on the matrix norm,
we can transform it into error on xby applying the following formula:
∥∆x∥
∥x∥≤κ∥∆A∥
∥A∥
1−κ∥∆A∥
∥A∥(B20)
Since ∥A∥= 1 , and∥x∥= 1 , we have:
∥∆x∥ ≤κ∥∆A∥
1−κ∥∆A∥≤κt
r−κt(B21)

--- PDF page 18 ---
18
Trotter error distribution
00.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.160.180.20510152025
Commutator distribution
00.5 11.5 22.5 33.5 400.20.40.60.811.21.4Figure 1: Trotter error and commutator distributions
1
FIG. 9: T rotter error and commutator distribution.
∥∆x1∥ ≤r
20
3πk
t0(B22)
Under the constraint:
t0≤2πT⇒1
T≤1−2πκ
t0(B23)
Here,T represents the number of repetitive unitaries, which is 2 to the power of number of clock qubits, and t0is
the maximum evolution time, given by tT . These constraints ensure that the eigenvalues fall within the range of the
QPE estimation. F or simplicity , let’s assume t0=πT to meet the first constraint, and later we’ll see that the second
constraint is satisfied automatically . Then the error in this step is given by:
∥∆x2∥ ≤r
20
3k
T(B24)
Now let’s combine the error in both steps, by using the triangular inequality:
∥∆x∥=∥∆x1+ ∆x2∥ ≤ ∥ ∆x1∥+∥∆x2∥ (B25)
F or simplicity we let ∥∆x1≤ϵ
2and∥∆x2≤ϵ
2, then we have:
r≥2
ϵ+ 1
πκ≈2πκ
ϵ(B26)
T≥r
80
3κ
ϵ(B27)
Finally , we combine those two to get the number of HS1 operations needed:
nHS1=Trs≥q
320
3πκ2s
ϵ2(B28)
Where we assume that there are s number of HS1 per HS, this assumption requires that the oracle needs to
implement the seperation of an s-sparse matrix into s number of one sparse matrices, this does not hold in general,
but for applications with certain structures this can be done.

--- PDF page 24 ---
24
CGNE Algorithm
Algorithm 1 CGNE
Require: A∈Rn×m, b∈Rm, x0
1:k←0
2:r0←b−Ax0,z0←ATr0,p0←z0
3:while ∥rk∥> ϵdo
4: wk←Apk
5: αk←∥zk∥2
∥wk∥2
6: xk+1←xk+αkpk
7: rk+1←rk−αkwk
8: zk+1←ATrk+1
9: βk←∥zk+1∥2
∥zk∥2
10: pk+1←zk+1+βkpk
11: k←k+ 1
12:end while
Ensure: xk
1
FIG. 13: CGNE Algorithm
Appendix D: The classical counterparts
1. Conjugate Gradient Method
In this section we introduce the runtime resource estimation of the Conjugate Gradient method.
Definition 1 (LSP) .The Linear System Problem: Find a vector x∈Rnsuch that it satisfies equation Ax=bwith
coeﬀicient matrix A∈Rm×nand right-hand side (RHS) vector b∈Rn.
A basic approach for solving an LSP is Gaussian elimination, or LU factorization, with O(N3)arithmetic operations.
IfA is a square symmetric positive semi definite (PSD) matrix, we can also apply Cholesky factorization with
O(N3)arithmetic operations. The best complexity for an iterative algorithm with respect to N isO(Ns√κlog(1/ϵ))
arithmetic operations for the Conjugate Gradient (CG) method solving systems with symmetric PSD matrices, where
sis the maximum number of non-zero elements in any row or column of A,κis the condition number of A, andϵis
the error allowed. If matrix A is just symmetric, one can use the Lanczos algorithm with higher complexity . F or an
LSP with a general square matrix A, the best iterative method is the GMRES algorithm, which has O(n3)worst-case
complexity [44]. F or problems in the form of ETEx=ETψ, known as normal equations, one can use a version of CG
methods with complexity O(ndκElog(1/ϵ)), whereκEis the condition number of matrix E [44]. F or a linear system
in general form with a non-PSD non-symmetric matrix, one can use the reformulation ATAx=ATband use a CG
method to solve it. Although CG methods for this reformulation have better worst-case complexity than GMRES
for the original system, practically GMRES has better performance, especially for large sparse systems with a large
condition number [44].
Here, we want to use CGNE (Algorithm 8.5 of [44]) as indicated in Algorithm 13.
As we can see, there is no matrix-matrix product in the CG algorithm. At each iteration, we need to perform two
mat-vec products. F or each sparse mat-vec product, we require 2Ns FLOPs. Additionally , we need three times vector
summation with 2N FLOPs. Also, 8N FLOPs needed for calculating αandβ. T otal FLOPs needed in each iteration
is4Ns+ 6N+ 8N. Thus the dominant cost is for mat-vec products.
Theorem 4. Starting from x0= 0 , Algorithm 13 reaches to∥xk−x∥
∥x∥≤ϵafterk≥1
2κlog 2
ϵ
.
Proof can be found in [45].
F or as-sparse Hermitian matrix, the total number of the FLOPs are
(1
2κlog2
ϵ
)×(4Ns+ 6N+ 8N) (D1)

--- PDF page 25 ---
25
2. Cholesky Decomposition Method
Cholesky decomposition, combined with subsequent Gaussian elimination, can be eﬀiciently parallelized with min-
imal overhead, particularly for large matrices. This allows us to maintain intermediate matrices in a sparse form,
enabling storage within GPU memory .
The algorithm based on Cholesky decomposition consists of the following steps:
1. Given a permutation of rows and columns of the linear equation matrix P and vector b, optimize the process
for solving Px=b.
2. Construct the necessary data structures to compute and store P.
3. Perform Cholesky decomposition: P=LL⊤, whereLis a sparse lower triangular matrix.
4. Solve the triangular systems: first, solve Ly=bfory, then solve L⊤x=yforx.
F or comparison with quantum algorithm performance evaluations, we exclude GPU data loading and unloading
time from our analysis.
Additionally , we conclude that each step of the algorithm is fully parallelizable, with the exception of synchronization
overhead, which remains negligible.
W e calculate the number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) for each step, where:
•N represents the size of matrix P and vector b.
•sis the maximum number of non-zero elements per row (or column), assuming the matrix is symmetric.
Step 1: Permutation of Rows and Columns
Exploiting matrix symmetry , we traverse each row and swap matrix elements as necessary , leading to:
FLOPs =N·s·(s+ 1) (D2)
Step 2: Data Structure Construction
Assuming the matrix is already stored in an optimal format, the primary operation is generating the index structures,
which takes:
FLOPs =N·s (D3)
Step 3: Cholesky Decomposition
F or each row, we perform factorization computations, resulting in:
FLOPs =N·(1 +s+ 2s2) (D4)
Step 4: T riangular Solve
This involves solving two triangular systems, first for yand then for x:
FLOPs =N·(1 +s)·4 (D5)
T otal FLOPs
Summing all the FLOPs from the above steps:
T otal FLOPs =N·s·(s+ 1) +N·s+N·(1 +s+ 2s2) +N·(1 +s)·4 (D6)
=N·(3s2+ 7s+ 5) (D7)
Since the CD method is fully parallelizable, we can estimate the runtime by simply divide the FLOPS by the
supercomputer’s execution speed. According to [46], some of the state-of-the-art supercomputer parameters are
summerized in IV.
Using these parameters—assuming k= 10 ,s= logN,ϵ= 0.01, and a quantum computer clock cycle of 10 ns—
along with a fast block implementation where a logical T operation is executed per clock cycle, we can compute the
runtime of the CD method on a supercomputer and compare it with the Quantum Linear Systems Algorithm (QLSA).
The results of this comparison are presented in Figure 14.
Our analysis indicates that the CD method exhibits a time complexity of 3Ns2, which, in contrast to the CG
method (see 2), has a less favorable dependence on s. However, a key advantage of this algorithm is its high degree
of parallelizability , enabling eﬀicient execution on supercomputers. Leveraging this capability significantly enhances
its performance in terms of runtime. Consequently , the onset of potential quantum advantage may be delayed,
as illustrated in Figure 14, where it is projected to emerge at a problem size of 2100≈1030. Nevertheless, since
the runtime of QLSA doesn’t scaling much with matrix size, the runtime required to reach the potential quantum
advantage threshold remains approximately 200 hours.

--- PDF page 26 ---
26
Name FLOP/s
Aurora 1.012×1018
El Capitan FP64 2.726×1018
El Capitan FP32 5.453×1018
El Capitan FP16 4.361×1019
El Capitan FP8 8.721×1019
F rontier FP64/32 1.810×1018
T ABLE IV: Supercomputer FLOP/s Comparison
101102
Matrix size, 2^n1017
1012
107
102
103108101310181023HoursExecution time
Aurora
El Capitan FP64
El Capitan FP32
El Capitan FP16
El Capitan FP8
Frontier FP64/32
Quantum
FIG. 14: Runtime comparison of the CD method across different supercomputers.
Appendix E: Quantum energy analysis
The energy consumption of a quantum computer can be estimated as the product of three factors: the scale of the
quantum computer (i.e., the number of physical qubits), the energy eﬀiciency of the quantum computer (i.e., power
consumption per qubit), and the operating time. This relationship is expressed as:
E=nq×Pq×T, (E1)
where:
•E is the total energy consumption,
•nqis the number of physical qubits,
•Pqis the power consumption per physical qubit, and
•T is the total operating time.
The values of nqandT are determined from prior analysis, leaving Pqas the main parameter to be explained in
detail.
a. Power consumption per qubit
As derived in [15], the power consumption per physical qubit, Pq, can be expressed as:
Pq=q"
1 +ϕ 
1 +βn−1/3
p
ηcCOP (Tc)|c!
+1−ϕ
FOM (To)#
, (E2)
where: